
--- PAGE 1 ---
 
 


--- PAGE 2 ---
  
 
 


--- PAGE 3 ---
A Brief Introduction to BFI 
Trading  
The term BFI can stand for many things, but when it comes to BFI 
Trading, it stands for Banks and Financial institutions; but mainly 
banks. If only a few whale -like market participants transact the vast 
majority  of the trading volume moved on any given trading day, then 
why not focus our energy on attempting to tag along these BFI 
market participants, after identifying their positioning. This entire 
trading methodology is based on identifying the certain ranges 
through which BFI's transact; and positioning ourselves there and 
ready, if and when price returns to that range.   
This is not a complicated methodology at all. We are buying in those 
places where BFI's have shown themselves to be buyers. We will 
learn how to identify a valid BFI price range in the future, but for now 
suffice it to say that we attempt to buy in those areas on a chart 
where BFI's have decided that it is a great deal to buy there.   
Trading has nothing to do with us; it is strictly about BFI's.  Some of 
you may want to discover the specifics in terms of how BFI's operate 
internally when trading markets, but it is our belief that the ways the 
BFI trading algorithms work are some of the most closely held secrets 
on the planet. We do not need to kno w the specifics of their 
operations in order to benefit financially from the way they   conduct 
their operations, consistently. We just need to learn how to be on the 
same side of them. The BFI's are responsible for pushing your trade 
to your target and the  BFI's are responsible for turning your trade 
into a loss. BFI's move markets, and all we can do is learn a simple 
method of tagging alongside them, and riding the market movements 
wherever they decide to push them.   

--- PAGE 4 ---
Our experience is directly related to t he trading of currency markets 
as BFI's dominate almost all foreign exchange, and almost all fiat 
currency usually passes through the hands of a bank or financial 
institution. We have primarily traded on financial instrument for the 
past eight years. Howev er, the BFI tools and methods can be 
applicable to all financial instruments and markets, as it is our belief 
that BFI's dominate all financial markets, including commodities, 
indices, and now cryptocurrency as well, as we see BFI's entering and 
beginning to saturate any potentially new financial instruments that 
they can benefit from.   
Our BFI Trading Rules for Beginners   
One Instrument   
Decide on the one financial instrument or currency pair to which you will dedicate your early 
years. This BFI methodology requires being in -tune with your instrument thus improving 
accuracy thus improving risk -reward metrics. Too many pairs can be a big problem if a trader 
cannot yet handle one.  
One Session  
Decide on the one trading session within which you will b e active. Limit your trading time to a 
couple hours per day and do not trade everyday. The best time to trade is when both London 
banks and NY banks are open for business. Too much trading and chart -time can be a big 
problem for most.   
 
One System  
Your edge in trading must be very clear. We'll cover a simple trading system designed to find 
trading setups in the pre -click analytical stage as well as a simple profit system or plan on 
getting paid post -click. A skilled sailor plans out their path and destin ation before setting 
sail.   
THREE STAGES OF A TR ADE SETUP  
Finding your trade setup is one important step that should take  most  of the 
time.   
Entering your trade setup is one important step that should take  very 
little  time.   
Leaving your trade setup is the most important step and traders work on 
this forever .  

--- PAGE 5 ---
 1. Finding   
  
 2. Entering  
  
 3. Leaving  
 
1. Finding  
Pre-Click:  
 
This initial step of finding a trading setup should take the majority of 
a traders  time. This is the "work" of actively searching for an 
opportunity on your instrument. Depending on your setup, it may not 
occur every day, or once a week, but you must be ready for it when it 
arrives. This simple guide focuses on trading the opportunity t hat 
may print at a pre -validated price -range or area on the chart, 
discussed in  Volume I .  
2. Entering  
Click;  
 
This next step of entering a trading setup can only follow a complete 
analysis of the instrument and corresponding setup. This should only 
take a  few moments, if a monthly context is already understood, and 
the proper stop -level and target -level placed, if the the BFI price -
range has already been validated from the proper analysis done in 
the initial step.   
3. Leaving   
Post -click;  
 
This step is not necessary for the probabilistically -wired trader. The 
ability to allow a trade to either hit a target -level or a stop -level 
should be sub -conscious, but unfortunately for most it is an 

--- PAGE 6 ---
emotional roller -coaster ride post -entry. Understandin g yourself and 
your own destructive habits is key here. Dig into the roots in order to 
discover the wiring needed to be able to allow trading setups to fully 
play out without micro -managing and interfering and sabotaging. We 
will discuss this in the final volume.   
Summary  
BFI Trading is simple trading.   It is based on buying in an area where 
we have confirmed BFI's have also previously bought there. We 
follow and tag along, after identifying their  footprints , and after 
identifying a  valid confirmation entry  signal , both of which we will 
discuss now  
 
 
 
 
Volume I: Finding Setups  
The act of finding a trading setup is a very important one. Some may 
call this the process of "technical analysis", but for simplistic 
purposes we will call it the process of  finding a  valid setup  on  your 
one instrument.   
What makes a setup valid? It all starts with determining a monthly 
bias, as we will see in the next chapter, that is step one. The next step 
is going onto your trading timeframe and identifying a valid footprint 
marke t movement on a chart. We cannot predict BFI movements, so 
by definition we can only see what they've done, after they have 
stepped. How does this help us trade if we can only see that the BFI's 
bought only  after  they have bought and created their footprin t? Now 
you are starting to ask the proper questions for proper trading.   
Can BFI's buy everything they need to buy all at once?   

--- PAGE 7 ---
They "can", but they typically do not.  
Can BFI's buy everything they need to buy all at once? They "can", 
but they typically do  not. Would that be efficient? Since they transact 
the largest amounts of volume, they would be better off buying 
some, and then later buying more (adding to position and protecting 
position), over  multiple purchases; stacking.  (see the BFI Trading 
Course for more information regarding buy -stacking and sell -stacking 
identification)   
Since BFI's transact the largest amounts of trading volume on the 
planet, this can be both an advantage and a disadvantage to our 
fellow banksters. The advantage is that they co ntrol the majority of 
the trading volume in markets. This is also their disadvantage, 
because when they transact the largest daily volumes, they need to 
be careful not to buy in a way that does not raise the price too much 
on themselves. The trick requires  that they do not purchase what 
they need to purchase all in one transaction. For BFI's to operate 
smoothly and accumulate their heavy volumes, we have learned to 
accept that they conduct  multiple purchases (at different times and 
through different exchang es).   
Instead of buying 100 units at a single price, BFI's may buy 50 units initially, and 
then buy another 50 units later, if and when price returns to that same price -range.   
Buy; then later, add and protect.   
A trading setup is an opportunity to be pos itioned to buy at 
the origin  of a valid BFI footprint,  and BFI's decide to add  again  and 
thus protect, and create  another valid BFI footprint,  which 
completes a full  Buy-Cycle . We will discuss Cycles in the last chapter 
of Volume I: Finding Setups.  
But wha t does a valid BFI footprint look like?   
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Let us look at an example of such a footprint in  theory , and in the 
next sections we will go into details on finding and focusing on the 
few footprints that matter on a chart.  
The BFI Footprint   
 
A valid BFI Footprint that breaks three previous market structure swing points.   
A BFI footprint  is like a  fingerprint , because they are all  unique  in 
their own way, and come in all  shapes and sizes and strengths , as we 
will see in the chapter on  Validating Ranges .  
If you notice the origin of this BFI footprint, you will notice it is circled 
in gray. This origin creates a  RANGE; or price -range of the 


--- PAGE 9 ---
origin.  Notice we did not say it is a certain price -level, but rather 
a RANGE  of prices, that create an  area  that has b oth a  price -floor , 
and a  price -base.   
So what does a classic trading opportunity or setup look like?  
The Opportunity   
 
When price returns to a valid range for the first, opportunity may be in the air. You have found a 
valid setup that now requires a valid  price action entry confirmation signal.   
This is a great time for any trader if they were to see the above 
representation printed on the chart of their one instrument. The 
single most important question here is  whether or not  the BFI's who 


--- PAGE 10 ---
created the ori ginal footprint will add and protect their initial position 
and create another valid BFI footprint that the trader can take 
advantage of.   
The first retest of a valid BFI range, created by a valid BFI footprint, is the potential 
trading  opportunity .  
A break of previous market swing points, and then a  return  for the first time 
to the  origin  of the footprint that caused the break.   
Notice the origin of the BFI footprint creates a  valid price -range  within the 
two horizontal rays.   
This is only a  POTENTIAL  opportunity.   Let us see what it would like if 
it turned out to be a  SUCCESSFUL  opportunity.   
The Successful Opportunity  
 
Finding a valid setup is one thing, but finding a setup that successfully works out simply means 
that BFI's added and protected thei r initial positions, and another footprint was created, causing 
an A to B impulsive market movement along which a BFI trader can tag along.   
A successful trading opportunity is one where BFI's do in fact add to 
their initial position and protect their init ial position, and thus 


--- PAGE 11 ---
another footprint is created and this new A to B market movement is 
the A to B price movement that we are trying to ride and benefit 
from.   
Finding a setup is about finding a valid footprint that was likely 
created by BFI's, and bein g ready if price were to return to the origin 
of the footprint. That is where the opportunity lies, and hopefully 
BFI's add and protect their initial positions, and we are able to catch a 
portion of the A to B movement labelled above, and thus benefitting 
from the printing of another BFI footprint that now completes a full 
buy-cycle: buying, and then buying more, for a total of two 
footprints. Yes, cycles can last longer and the possibilities can be 
endless, but learning to take advantage of a certain part of the BFI 
buy-cycle can allow you to find and catch these very specific trading 
setups on your one instrument.   
Now that we have a good picture of what we are trying to  find, we 
can now  begin learning  how to go about doing so. First, we need to 
begin by determining the monthly directional bias before getting into 
detailed footprint validation using different footprints on different 
timeframes. For now, let us take a step back and end this 
introductory chapter on  Finding Setups  with a reminder of our 
gener al approach to trading BFI markets; and all markets are BFI 
markets.   
Differentiating between the time for  trading action  and the time 
for trading inaction  is a trading skill that requires years to develop. 
But let us take a step back and understand where most of the trading 
pain can be found.   

--- PAGE 12 ---
 
The low hanging fruits of trading are found at the edges. The edges are where the origins of 
footprints occur. Price does not sit there for long, and the risk -reward asymmetry in those areas 
is critical for long -term trading success.  
The low hanging fruits of trading are found at the edges. The edges are where 
the origins of footprints occur. Price does not sit there for long, and the risk -
reward asymmetry is critical for having those few large trading wins that eac h 
outweigh multiple losses.   
 
 
Get to work when it matters and watch out not to be sucked into 
the manipulation & randomness  of trading in the  middle . Proper traders 
should  already be positioned .  
 
 
Play at the  edges  of price action, where  retracements and  market 
manipulation  are unlikely to reach you. This means there will not be 


--- PAGE 13 ---
these valid trading setups all the time. The only ones who want you 
to be trading all the time are your brokers and market makers.  They 
do not care if you click BUY or SELL; they just care that you 
CLICK.  This is a game of commissions and constant scalping, and so it 
is your duty to understand this and to get active only when the  odds 
are in your favor  and the trading opportunity you've found is clearly 
a validated BFI setup . That means being picky and realizing  less can 
make more .   
 
"Knowing when NOT to trade is more important than knowing when 
to trade.  Sit tight, and be right ." 
 
                                                                                       - @zerotoempire  
 
 
 Determining Monthly Bias  
The rustiest & dustiest  trading timeframe 
is the monthly timeframe; because barely 
anybody uses it as it is the least 
understood.  
 
So let us try to understand it. Using the monthly timeframe  does not 
mean  we need to  wait months. It is almost like an allergy they have 
towards the monthly chart. We can still take great 4H and 15m 
intraday movements and still have our monthly bias in mind. Note 
that we do not  TRADE  the monthly chart; it is best used only to 
identify a p roper  directional bias . We use  two lower timeframes as 

--- PAGE 14 ---
the TRADING   timeframes; the  4H and the  1W.  We use these two 
lower trading timeframes to identify valid footprints and valid fresh 
retest trading opportunities, and to trade them.   Whether you are 
a 4H range (intra -day)  trader, or a  weekly range  (swing)  trader; 
the monthly directional bias identification should be step one for all 
BFI traders.   
Properly identifying the monthly directional bias is a skill a trader develops over many years of 
trading. It  may take time initially, but eventually this step should become much quicker and the 
bias much more accurate over time. A wrong monthly bias can be a very expensive 
mistake.  Seasoning is key to proper trading, and eventually you'll 
determine the monthly b ias in less than a minute.  
The first step when opening the chart of any new or familiar 
instrument is to begin on the monthly timeframe and orient yourself 
properly. A proper orientation means you are not focused on what 
happened decades ago. A proper mont hly orientation means you 
have just the last two to three years of price -action shown and those 
candles take up the vast majority of your screen.   
A improper monthly orientation vs a 
proper one:  

--- PAGE 15 ---
 
An improper monthly orientation.  The majority of the chart here includes candlesticks that are irrelevant at this 
moment in time; the chart should be oriented towards the candlesticks that matter today; this applies to all 
timeframes when analyzing your instrument.     


--- PAGE 16 ---
 
A proper monthly orientation; the most recent few years are relevant. Focus on the price action 
that matters today.  
After a proper monthly orientation, we can begin trying to identify 
the direction  the current monthly impulsive market movement is 
heading. A  directional bia s means the monthly is used to answer the 
question of where is price likely headed;  up or down . Is the 


--- PAGE 17 ---
instrument in an  uptrend or a downtrend;  is the instrument  bullish 
or bearish ? These words are to be used on the monthly and this 
question should only be  asked and attempted to be answered, on 
the monthly timeframe.  Some may argue that there is a third option 
of the market being "sideways/consolidating" but rarely does the 
monthly chart move sideways and consolidates; that would make the 
simple support and  resistance trading quite easy.   
The Most Recent Monthly Impulsive Movement  

--- PAGE 18 ---
 
The highlighted area in red represents the most recent impulsive monthly movement, and 
that should be the main focus. However, in this case we have a monthly zone to the left (th e 
origin of the previous downwards impulsive monthly movement) that we must be aware of 
today.   
Now that we have a clear monthly orientation, we can begin to look 
at the  options  we have in terms of deciding on a monthly directional 
bias confirmation.  


--- PAGE 19 ---
 
Potentially Reversing   
                              
 
 


--- PAGE 20 ---
The origin of a monthly impulsive move creates a valid zone. When price returns to any valid monthly price -zone, 
the bias must be Potentially Reversing; not Bullish and not Bearish.   
 
 
Most traders have the most difficult time when the instrument is in 
the stage of   a monthly bias of  Potentially Reversing . It is much 
easier to identify a strong  bullish  up-move, and a 
strong  bearish  down -move; it becomes quite obvious which direction 
the market is bei ng pushed on this special timeframe.   
 
Identifying a proper and valid monthly price -range to be aware of is a 
main concern for BFI traders. They are looking and anticipating where 
the buying party may end; they are looking and anticipating where 
the sellin g party may end. Knowing where an A to B monthly price 
movement  originated from  and where the current A to B monthly 
price movement is likely  heading , is a key skill of a BFI trader. They 
understand that a strong bullish move does not go up forever, and 
price may reverse when it arrives at a monthly sell -zone. They also 
keep this in mind when determining targets. They also understand 
that a strong bearish move does not go down forever, and price may 
reverse when it arrives at a monthly buy -zone. Knowing the  higher 
timeframe monthly context of where price may potentially reverse is 
a pre -requisite before we can use lower timeframes and become 
accurate there as well.   
Let us take a look at this monthly chart of several years and break it down into pieces and s ee 
what the proper bias would be and how it changes over time.   

--- PAGE 21 ---
 
Notice in the green circle is when the monthly impulsive up -move is confirmed. By the fifth 
candle, multiple bullish signals have printed to confirm the bullish bias. Notice in the red circle 
is when the monthly impulsive down -move begins to form. Within five to ten candles, the 
bearish bias confirmation and the downwards movement should be obvious.   
Notice in the green circle is when the monthly impulsive up -move is confirmed. The bulli sh engulfing signal that 
breaks multiple previous candle highs is very significant and should wake up many. By the fifth candle, multiple 


--- PAGE 22 ---
bullish signals have printed to confirm the bullish bias. Notice in the red circle is when the monthly impulsive 
down -move begins to form. The first strong bearish engulfing signal that breaks the previous four monthly lows is 
significant. Multiple monthly footprints downward confirm a bearish bias that should become clear within five to 
ten candles. You do have a monthly  basing sell -zone to the upper -left, and that may have contributed to the 
reversal and the beginning of a monthly downmove.   
 
Price has returned for the first time to a valid monthly buy -zone. The monthly bias will shift 
from Bearish to Potentially Revers ing the moment price enters the buy -zone.   
Price has returned for the first time to a valid monthly buy -zone. The monthly bias will shift 
from  Bearish  to Potentially Reversing  the moment price enters the buy -zone. Notice that two bullish signals 
printed at  the buy -zone. That is not a good sign for sellers. The first signal is a complete bullish engulfing pattern, 
and then upon the return to the range, another bullish pinbar with an exceptionally long wick prints; the 
special  COVID -candle .  
Buy at the Buy -Zone  
Seems quite obvious, but you'd be surprised to discover how few 
people do this. A BFI trader understands that the majority of the 
world population is selling heavily and the sentiment is very bearish 
by the time it gets to a monthly buy -zone, and espec ially when it goes 
into the deeper -half or beyond the floor of the buy -zone entirely. 
This does not invalidate the price -range, since a zone invalidation 
would require a monthly candle -closure below the range. The least 
risk trade idea is to buy at strong monthly buy -zones, especially in 
the deeper half . The highest risk trade idea is to sell at such areas; try 


--- PAGE 23 ---
to avoid doing so. Do not stand in the way and bet against these 
monthly zones. Be aware of them and be aware of the monthly bias 
of your instrument  at all times.   
The bias shifts when price  enters  a monthly zone; but the bias 
does  not necessarily shift when price  leaves  a monthly zone.   
When price enters a monthly buy -zone, the bias shifts to Potentially 
Reversing and the bias remains that way until an official confirmation 
occurs that gives us the validation to shift the bias. The monthly bias 
does not change everyday, and it rarely shifts and when it does, it 
does so slowly, and it may take a few candles to end up seeing the 
reaction.   
 
However, jus t because price  exits and leaves  the monthly buy -zone 
does  NOT  mean the bias becomes  bullish . All it takes to shift the bias 
to Potentially Reversing is price  entering  a valid zone. However, it will 
take  much more  than price  exiting/leaving  a monthly buy -zone for 
us to shift towards a  bullish bias.   
Two methods  to shifting your bias from  Potentially Reversing  to Bullish : 
- After a bullish candlestick signal confirmation prints and closes outside the 
valid price range.  
- After a valid footprint occurs that b reaks a previous market swing point.  

--- PAGE 24 ---
 
A bullish engulfing candlestick signal prints outside of the valid buy -zone. A bearish pinbar 
that gets engulfed is a perfectly valid signal confirmation to shift to a Bullish monthly bias.  
The first reaction  at the range caused a series of green candlesticks 
that formed an A to B movement that returned to the range of the 
bearish monthly pinbar above; the origin of a valid footprint 
downwards. Price returned to the valid monthly zone.   
The second reaction  at the range is more interesting. Notice that the 
no monthly candle body is able to close within the range. It is only a 
wick that remains in the zone. This is significant buying activity, 
following heavy panic selling activity. But this one candle alone, 
although a strong bullish candle, is not enough to confirm a Bullish 
bias. However, when the bullish engulfing candlestick signal prints 


--- PAGE 25 ---
away from the zone after price has left it; that is a good time to shift 
Bullish.   
Let us zoom into this bullish engulfing:  

--- PAGE 26 ---
 
A "bearish" pinbar is engulfed by a bullish candlestick; this makes the bullish engulfing 
confirmation even stronger. More likely reaching higher; not rejecting.   
But to us this "bearish" pinbar is far from bearish. Even before the engulfing c andlestick prints, 
a BFI trader can see that this pinbar wick is likely  reaching  higher, and not  rejecting  higher. One 


--- PAGE 27 ---
wick takes out three previous monthly candle highs; but could not break any previous monthly 
candle lows; a very bullish sign. When that pinbar gets engulfed; the bias becomes Bullish.   

--- PAGE 28 ---
 


--- PAGE 29 ---
Just like a 4H chart; the A to B monthly move retraces healthily to the 50%, before BFI's enter 
again and create another new A to B monthly footprint.   
The bullish bias continues until we reach a valid mon thly zone at 
which we become  Potentially Reversing  again.   
 
The bullish bias shifts from Bullish to  Potentially Reversing  as soon as 
price  enters  the red range. Not a bad idea to close longs at monthly 
sell-zones.    
Conclusion  
It may take some time to get used to understanding the monthly 
bias and the way it shifts as price moves from zone to zone on the 
higher timeframe, but with a few years of practice it will become 
much easier to read the monthly timeframe and you will reali ze 


--- PAGE 30 ---
how accurate one can become on the smaller timeframes when the 
monthly timeframe is well -understood.  
 
 
 Validating Ranges  
What makes a range valid? What makes the origin of a footprint an 
origin worth taking into consideration?   
A valid BFI footprint is  required to validate a BFI range.   
Obviously we need a strong A to B price movement known as a BFI 
footprint in order to validate the origin of this price movement so 
that when price returns to the origin for the first time, we may have a 
trading opportun ity. This trading strategy is based on the first -retest 
of the valid BFI origin. Will they buy more and protect their initial 
position and create another valid BFI footprint? That is the only 
question.   
 
THE STRENGTH OF THE MOVE:  
Obviously the word strong  is subjective, but the stronger the A to B then the 
more likely it is to be protected at the first retest. Strength of the footprint must 
always be taken into consideration.   


--- PAGE 31 ---
 
This is a strong footprint. What is a good way to define and measure 
strength?  Count the candles. How   many candles to get down from A 
to B? About 20. That is a lot. How many candles to back from B to C: 
one, and the entire footprint is only a few candles. That is a strong 


--- PAGE 32 ---
footprint and not something to get in the way of; watch the origin of 
such movements.   
THE WAY PRICE BREAKS:  
The way price breaks the previous swing point is also something that is taken 
into consideration when analyzing any potential BFI footprint. Does price break the 
previous swing point with a body and close ab ove it? Does price break the previous 
swing point with a wick and unable to close above it? The way price breaks a 
previous swing gives us more information about the probability of success at the 
first-retest.   
 
The above is an example of a weak break; al though the previous 
swing point high is broken, it is only broken by a wick and then what 
follows is a series of bearish candles. Although both BFI footprints are 


--- PAGE 33 ---
valid, they are not equal. Compare this break above with the break 
below:   
 
Here the A to B move breaks the previous swing point strongly with 
candle body's. A strong break serves for a strong footprint, especially 


--- PAGE 34 ---
when the price closes higher and stays above there, versus a weak 
small tap and rejection type of break.  
PREVIOUS SWING POINT(s):  
This is also an important point to take into consideration when studying any 
potential BFI footprint. Does the A to B movement break  one previous swing point 
or does it break  multiple  previous swing points?   
 
In the above example, the BFI footprint breaks multiple previous 
market swing points. This is the preferred method of validation for 
BFI footprint; multiple previous market swing points have been 
breached. Be careful with footprints that have only breached one 
previous market swing point; especially if  it is a very weak market 
swing point.   
A market swing point is a  series  of candles that go in one direction followed by a 
reversal and a  series  of candles that go in the opposite direction; a market "u -turn".   


--- PAGE 35 ---
 
Watch out for A to B price movements that o nly breach one previous 
swing point and a weak one. Remember, the strong body -break 
footprints that break multiple previous swing points are the origins 
with the best probability of success. Although there are many ways to 


--- PAGE 36 ---
validate a footprint, that does n ot mean every footprint needs to 
become a trade idea. Take into account the strength of the footprint 
when validating any BFI origin and eventually valid price -range.   
 
Many traders are focused on the weakest footprints with the 
weakest breaks using the we akest basing zone candles on the 
smallest timeframes. This is not the recipe for accuracy and success. 
Not everyday will you be seeing a great solid and tradable BFI 
footprint, but be ready when you see one.   
Now that we have a better idea on how 
to validate the origin of an A to B price 
movement which we call a valid BFI 
footprint; let us now discuss how to 
determine and draw a proper price -range 
at the origin.   
 
 
 Drawing Ranges  
Now that we can validate an A to B movement on whether or not it 
qualifies as an official and valid BFI footprint. By analyzing the strong 
A to B movement and how it breaks previous market swing points, 
we need to understand how to draw the origin of this now -valid BFI 
footprint.   
TWO HORIZONTAL RAYS:   
These two lines a re more than enough to properly draw the origin of a valid 
BFI footprint.   

--- PAGE 37 ---
Ray 1: At the LOW.   
This is the first ray and the simplest. The placement of this ray s non -
negotiable. It must be at the  low of the origin; the floor; the  cheapest 
price  on the pla net for that time period.   

--- PAGE 38 ---
 


--- PAGE 39 ---
 


--- PAGE 40 ---
 
It is rather straightforward and the vast majority do not have an issue 
with the placement of this level; the  low of the range. What some 


--- PAGE 41 ---
have trouble with is the placement of the second ray; the  base  of the 
range.   
Ray 2: At the BASE.  
This second ray may be a bit more tricky; but not if you understand 
the idea behind the price level of the base. We could take the entire 
candle with the low, as the range of the origin; but that would create 
a zone that is much too wide to be  able to identify a valid signal at 
the first -retest. We need our zone to just the right size; not too small 
and not too big. This requires many years of seasoning to be able to 
identify the proper base; but with practice you will begin to see 
where the be st placement of the base should be.   
The definition of a  base  is the level at which the candle  closes . This 
usually works best; but there are some rare exceptions that a trader 
will learn over time where we need to find a  BETTER BASE.    

--- PAGE 42 ---
 
Some of the best zones are created by a pinbar such as the pinbar 
above; from the low to the base. In the rare case of a black candle; 
the base is at the open. In the case of a green candle; the base is at 
the close. In essence, the range is the entire candle, except the t op 
wick portion. Use the candle body only and include the range of the 
lower wick.   


--- PAGE 43 ---
In same cases, we can use the volume at the origin to determine the 
valid price range of the origin. The heaviest volume bars are included 
within the range, and the floor o f the range is always the low.   
 
The above example shows two methods; the classic method of using 
the the  low to the base; and using the heaviest volume method as 
the valid range. There is no right or wrong; understand the methods 
and learn to react at the first retest. There is no special tool that can 
tell us how deep the price will react at the first -retes t, and which 
price range will end up being respected, if any. This is the uncertainty 
of trading; instead of focusing on which range will work, focus instead 
on using a valid and consistent method for drawing your range and 
being prepared to react once pri ce enters it.   


--- PAGE 44 ---
 
Sometimes you will find tricky candles like those above that may 
make it difficult to identify the base. But in the cases of a strong 
bullish engulfing candle like above at the origin; you may use the 
entire engulfing candlestick signal as  the range, as shown above.   


--- PAGE 45 ---
 
It is not recommended to use under -sized zones like above that only 
use the lower wick. That is not enough of a valid price range to be 
able to read the price reaction at this range. We also do not want to 
use over -sized zone s, as that may make it difficult to identify the 
proper signal out of many signals that may print when the range is 


--- PAGE 46 ---
too wide. These is no science behind determining the best level for 
the base of the zone, but over time and depending on the unique 
origin i tself, drawing the proper origin of a valid BFI zone will 
eventually take a few seconds.   
Now that you can understand the strength of a BFI footprint and how to validate the zone 
and how to draw it, let us take a look at how these valid BFI zones get manip ulated.   
 
 
 
Manipulation At Ranges  
Manipulation is part of the game; and only BFI's can afford the 
liquidity required for manipulation. This word  "manipulation"  is an 
important one, and should be taken seriously as some of our trading 
systems are  dependent  on the occurrence of this manipulation. 
There are many forms of manipulation, and it is advisable that the 
trader become  comfortable  with this aspect of the business, because 
it is a double -edged sword.   At times, it can benefit us as we take 
advantage of  the manipulation occurrence to enter markets, while at 
other times the manipulation occurrence can take us out of our trade 
setup.   
What is market manipulation?  
Price movements designed to manipulate the traders mentality.  
We must differentiate between th e manipulation of  price , and the 
manipulation of the  trader . The beginner trader is easily 
manipulated; some of them from the printing of the slightest candle 
against them. However, a BFI trader understands manipulation, 
anticipates it, and learns to be po sitioned for it and to benefit by it. 
BFI's control and manipulate the price action and the candlesticks, 
but the true manipulation is the manipulation of the 
traders  mindset,  to click the wrong button .  

--- PAGE 47 ---
 
Let us take a look at this valid 4H price range. Price has reacted to the 
top half of the range, and consolidated slightly before a two bearish 
candles print that push price into the deeper range of the zone. For 
most beginners, this may seem like a risky time to buy; and this is by 
design. By design within the engineering of the markets, price action 
is designed to scare away simple -minded and easily manipulated 
retail individuals to make it seem very risky to buy at a time like this. 
In fact, times like t hese are the times of the least risk, whether they 
believe that or not.   
By market design; price action will be the most bearish before the strong 
bullish impulsive movement arrives, in order to attract and acquire liquidity.   
Liquidity in markets means orders; order -flow volume. If there is 
nobody to buy from or to sell to; then there is no market. The more 


--- PAGE 48 ---
buyers and sellers available to freely transact, the more liquid that 
market becomes. Currency markets are the most liquid on the planet; 
but this li quidity is only visible to the seasoned BFI trader and 
invisible to most retail market participants. A proper BFI trader must 
learn to see what is not visible to the majority.    
Visualizing Liquidity   
Let us discuss this term liquidity and see if we can id entify certain 
areas or pockets of liquidity on a chart. This is such an essential key 
skill of any BFI trader in order to develop the level of seasoning 
required to be able to scalp and swing their instrument in different 
ways. To become a complete trader , a complete context of both the 
trading instrument and the trading setup.   
The stop -loss of a buyer is a sell -order. The target of a buyer is a sell -order. 
There is no such thing as a  stop -loss or a target; only buy -orders or sell -orders.  
 
It is very imp ortant to understand that as price moves downwards 
and into a buy -zone, there will be existing and newly attracted sellers 
that are in the market with every downwards tick. We understand 


--- PAGE 49 ---
that the  stop loss of a seller is just a buy -order , so as price dips into 
the deeper half of our range and even beyond the range, the selling 
attraction increases and thus the liquidity increases. It becomes much 
easier to buy a large amount when you have plenty of sell -side 
liquidity that may stem from many different sourc es. BFI's require 
liquidity, and a seemingly strong downwards movement into a buy -
zone like the one above can draw in some retail selling activity that 
can then be taken advantage of when the time is ripe.   
 
The market enjoys filling up "empty space" on c harts.   
The blue is liquidity; and it can stem from many different sources. 
The sellers contribute with their stop -loss being a buy -order, and the 
buyers contribute as well when they begin piling in after the market 
takes them out and reveals its cards.   
Although price action dipped below the range of the zone, an official 
zone invalidation requires a  macro -candle closure  beyond the zone; 
as discussed in the  BFI Trading Course  in detail. A zone is not wiped 
out officially until that occurs, but sometimes e ven when a candle 
closes outside the zone by a few ticks, the zone may still end up being 


--- PAGE 50 ---
respected; another example of manipulation of these valid BFI 
ranges. Do not be  too quick  to assume a certain valid BFI price range 
has been invalidated.   
 
Liquidity  is the engine -oil lubricant that keeps the market 
movements running smoothly. As the up -move begins, the sellers 
are buying back at a loss and the late breakout buying contributes 
to the momentum and a strong quick efficient movement.  
As price explodes an d the retail selling party disintegrates, it faces 
and triggers the engineered liquidity  that has progressively 
formed  above every market high  or swing point. In this market 
scenario, the market movement is much more accelerated. In the 
retail trading worl d, beginners' floating profits tend to be wiped away 
in an instant, for this reason. A bad understanding of liquidity and 
financial markets can  surprise  the retail trader with a 
weak   foundation of order -flow and liquidity. As the  opposite -


--- PAGE 51 ---
side liquidity i ncreases, the potential  opposite -side price 
movement  becomes stronger and the impulsive move may be more 
violent.   
 
 
AUDUSD 15min Manipulation   
 
Above is a screenshot taken from the  AUDUSD  instrument showing 
a 15min chart  within a valid  4H sell -zone range.  The first thing to 
notice is  the way price enters  the range; one  large green candle with 
a large wick  establishes a presence within the range. Notice that the 


--- PAGE 52 ---
price has penetrated the deeper half of the range right away from 
the initial reaction.   
Sometimes a candle prints that we call the  candle -with -the-presence .  
This candle -with -the-presence  is used as a  pre-context  in order to see if a 
potential trading opportunity may present itself, based on  the way price action 
operates within the range  of this candle.   
This means that as soon as the initial large green candle prints inside 
the zone and establishes a large range, we see a sideways movement 
of price -action within this candle range. This is a 15min consolidation 
pattern with multiple swing poi nts within a narrow range; this 
creates 15min liquidity that builds up on either side. This is the key to 
notice and understand when dealing with manipulation of valid BFI -
ranges. We do NOT use this candle to enter and execute upon; that is 
tricky. In the case above, the trader who entered after the initial 
candle experienced entirely all drawdown. Use this  candle -with -the-
presence  to see how price reacts to the range of this key candle 
range; and then react after the price -action  manipulated  the range.   

--- PAGE 53 ---
 
A common scenario is pictured above; retail sellers selling resistance 
may use this  "strong breakout"  and become retail buyers. 
Remember, we are not  "breakout"  traders, and there is no such 
thing as "strong" on such a weak timeframe such as the 15min. This  is 
manipulation at its finest; a twenty pip movement that breaks the 
range of an important swing point that triggers and manipulates 
many buyers and sellers in the market at this specific scenario. Those 
manual traders who repeatedly shift sides in the ma rket within a 
short period of time may suffer from this market manipulation. Do 
not be silly; rarely does the overall monthly directional bias shift from 


--- PAGE 54 ---
a few 15min candles. Your job is to react to the "reaction" that occurs 
at your valid range, knowing t hat the range can be manipulated in 
different ways.   
Your job is not to constantly enter and exit. Your job is to wait for that perfect 
moment that presents itself when the reaction at the valid range reveals its cards. 
You want to trade when the opportuni ty is so obvious and on -the-floor in front of 
you;  late is better than early.   
 
When one bearish candle engulfs the previous fifteen candles or 
more, then that is a significant break especially if it occurs after 
price  breaks outside  the range on the  micr o-timeframe  buts ends 
up closing inside  the range on the  macro -timeframe . Sometimes the 


--- PAGE 55 ---
15min price -action shown above the zone, ends up being a wick on 
the 4H chart. This is a key skill the trader must develop;  the ability to 
understand price -action on th e smaller timeframes, in order to 
anticipate how the macro -candle may end up closing on the higher 
timeframe.  
The difference between the way a candle opens and the way a candle closes can be 
the difference between night and day. Most of the manipulation of  the 1H candle 
occurs within the last 15min. Most of the manipulation of the 4H candle occurs 
within the last 1H.   
Conclusion  
Manipulation in financial markets is the norm. We can learn to neuro -
associate  positively  with this necessary part of the business, or you 
can neuro -associate  negatively  with market manipulation and be 
bothered by it. Sometimes, the market will take you out of your 
position, only to give you an even better entry -price. If the mind is 
agitated or if it isn't aware and open to taking advantage of any and 
all opportunities in the market, we may miss them. These validated 
price -ranges must be taken as an elastic band, and sometimes the 
market may push and stretch below your valid price -range, but t ry 
not to confuse  zone -invalidation  with  zone -manipulation .  
 
We focus on the  result  of the manipulation, and not the 
manipulation movement itself. Did price close below the range and 
stay there, or did it close only as a wick with a strong reversal? Study  
what occurs  after  the manipulation and price exits the range 
and how  the macro -candles  close. In trading, sometimes you need to 
be able to withstand a few punches and remain standing and aware. 
A trader can take a few losing trade ideas but those only ser ve the 
trader with valuable information and feedback, which can then help 
them find the next winning trade ideas.   
 
 

--- PAGE 56 ---
 The "Basing" Range   
The trader will see many different footprints of different shapes and 
sizes and strengths. That means the origin of each footprint, and the 
range it forms, will also be unique. There is a special range that we 
call a "basing" range, where the market pauses momentarily. This is 
an important aspect of trading alongside BFI's, and it will be 
discussed in this section in an  attempt to simplify and elaborate more 
on this certain type of range that is the root of many losses for many 
traders across the planet.  

--- PAGE 57 ---
 
Let us look at both points A and B above. Both are the origins of valid 
footprints, and thus can be valid ranges.  But are these two ranges 
equivalent?   
 


--- PAGE 58 ---
Let us study what happened theoretically at point B. This red arrow 
downwards can be classified as many different things that mean the 
same. Whether it is  sellers entering the market , or whether it is  long -
liquidation  (buyers closing   out), this  retracement  is a necessary part 
of price -action and this is behind the formation of all basing 
ranges.   In fact, without this retracement, price will not be able to 
continue for the next impulsive movement, because it is the BF I 
buyers behind the movement that come in and end the retracement 
when they deem the price cheap enough to start buying again.   
 


--- PAGE 59 ---
It is safe to assume that an A to B impulsive market movement can 
have  multiple  basing ranges or candlesticks within it. Howev er, there 
can only be  one origin ; by definition, there is only one  major  zone, 
while all other valid ranges created by valid footprints within the 
larger impulsive market movement are classified as  basing  zones or 
ranges.   
If there are multiple basing zone s within a single market movement, how do we 
know  which one will work ? 
In order to try to answer this key question, we need to better 
understand what a basing zone is and why sometimes we refer to it is 
a certain  opposite -color candle . A base within an A t o B market 
movement is like a resting and re -charging station, and which re -
charging station will work, if any, is dependent on the strength of the 
buyers behind that market movement. Just like any A to B movement 
retraces a certain percentage of its dista nce, before the next A to B 
movement begins.   

--- PAGE 60 ---
 
The above example shows the the origin of the market movement; 
the major zone. This is followed by a single black candle, and then the 
strong green candle that created the footprint of the now -validated 
basin g zone. IT is important to understand that basing ranges are the 
hardest to identify, because by definition they are in the middle of a 
market movement. The opposite -color candle   that is followed by a 
footprint is most likely a significant candle that for med the base of 
the footprint and its own range.   
The creation of a fresh basing range is not significant. They are created multiple 
times within any overall market movement. However, it does give a trading 
opportunity for those who were unable to tag alon g from the origin.   


--- PAGE 61 ---
 


--- PAGE 62 ---
 
You will encounter many names and labels throughout your trading 
career.    
 
 
 
 
Range Cycles  
We all know the market moves in  cycles : short -term  cycles and  long -
term  cycles, yet this up -and-down movement tends  to be a surprise 
for most. Gains quickly made tend to quickly vanish in the volatile 
environments of the currency markets. In this section, we will discuss 
the various types of cycles that occur on your currency instrument.   


--- PAGE 63 ---
                                         
     
This type of movement is very natural simply due to the laws of 
supply and demand. As prices go up and become  over -valued , it 
becomes less attractive to buyers and more attractive to sellers. As 
prices go down and become  under -valued , it becomes more 
attractive to buyers and less attractive to sellers. The forces between 
buyers and sellers are constantly in flux, but we know that only a few 
BFI market participants transact the majority of all the buying and the 
selling.   
How cheap is cheap  and how expensive is expensive?  That is the 
great subjective trading question that each trader must answer and 
analyze for themselves based on the price -action on their 
instrument.    


--- PAGE 64 ---
 
What is true at point A and what is true at point B?  
At point  A, we can say that this instrument is experiencing  buy order -
flow volume exhaustion . We could reach this point 
after  multiple  cycles of BFI  footprints upwards .  
 
At point  B, we can say that this instrument is experiencing  sell order -
flow exhaustion . We could rea ch this point after  multiple  cycles of 
BFI footprints downwards .  
 
Can we pre -determine point A and point B?  No.  
 
Can we be aware that we have been going up for the ride for a while, 
and the momentum of the buying is weakening or flattening?  Yes. 
  
The re al concern here is that the average retail trader mindset may 
start to get excited about  BUYING at point A  for fear of missing out 
or various other reasons. The real concern here is that the average 
retail trader mindset may start to get excited about  SELL ING at point 
B for fear price may go to zero or various other reasons. Awareness is 
a requirement in trading, and always put your trade idea within the 
larger context of the weekly or monthly cycle.  


--- PAGE 65 ---
This is why it is very important to be aware of the context of your 
instrument and where price -action is coming from and where price -
action is likely headed. After  multiple  BFI footprints upwards, there is 
almost a sure chance of some form of retracement or reversal. Is 
price -action retracing or is price ac tion reversing? That is up to you to 
find out later; we are not here to predict. We react and outcomes 
occur, and we move on. Rarely do you want to buy high; or after 
multiple up -footprints; wait for a healthy retracement and look 
towards buying after some  form of downwards movement.  
Very few things go up and down in a straight line. Very few things go 
to zero, and nothing goes up forever. The major problem in the retail 
world is an emotional one, because the tendency to buy may 
increase after multiple BFI footprints upwards. This is not rooted in 
logic or rationality, but logic and rationality are words that are rarely 
applied in markets. Sure, a buyer can buy high in the hopes of selling 
higher, but that is not a reliable hope -based strategy. BFI's buy low  
and sell high, at all times, and we do the same.   
A Simple Cycle   
A simple cycle consists of three important components. A valid  BFI 
footprint , followed by a  base  or market  pause/sideways , and then 
another  BFI footprint,  that obviously breaks the previous  high of the 
base.   

--- PAGE 66 ---
 
Price -action examples in this section are all based on  4H candlesticks. 
In the image above, we see a valid BFI footprint upwards followed by 
some sideways movement. In this example, this basing period is more 
pronounced and over a span of  many candles . Sometimes this entire 
basing movement could be  one single opposite -color candle ; there is 
no predicting the strength or power of the movements or trying to 
time the breakout. This is an example of a very smooth and simple 
complete buy -cycle; a clean and valid footprint followed by a basing 
period, followed by another clean and valid footprint, almost of 
similar sizes. Sure, another cycle may commence or it may not, but 
take this into consideration when deciding on position targets. Rar ely 
do you want to see a strong footprint followed by a basing period, 
and then to  bail out  within this pausing or retracing period; try to 
squeeze out a full -cycle out of your position. Our best trades arise 


--- PAGE 67 ---
from pocketing the positions at the  peak of a f ootprint -base -
footprint cycle.   
 
Here we have an example of a footprint followed by a base consisting 
of only a few candles, before the next strong footprint. Again, there is 
no predicting the speed or strength of a footprint. The market can go 


--- PAGE 68 ---
from point  A to point B, but not on your own personal schedule. It 
may take some time, it may take very little time; depending on the 
volume and the strength of demand from certain participants, and 
many other factors that you need not consider to benefit from the 
overall idea of the A to B market movement.   
A Full Cycle & Over -Extension   
 


--- PAGE 69 ---
Here is another great example of the proper way of looking at price -
action on the smaller timeframes such as the 4H. Without a doubt, 
the market makes a footprint downwards, a rat her clean break of 
previous market swing low. Again, after a healthy retracement 
upwards, another footprint down prints. At the peak of the footprint 
downwards, the market prints a very strong bullish pinbar. A smart 
trader would look to the left of their chart and see if price has arrived 
into a previous valid buy -zone in order to understand the context of 
this pinbar and where it printed.   
 
After this green pinbar, something interesting occurs, and it is 
something every trader should see. After multiple  footprints 
downwards  and potentially arriving at a valid buy -zone, we see the 
first footprint upwards . This is a significant shift in the price -action 
movements, and it likely simply means that BFI sellers have pocketed 
and reversed their positions. In fanc ier terms,  BFI may have 
completely distributed their sell -OFV  (order -flow volume)  and began 
accumulation of buy -OFV . If a resulting buy -cycle plays out after this 
point, then we know our assumption was true.   
When the valid BFI footprints downwards end, an d the valid BFI footprints 
upwards begin: WAKE UP; BFI's may have shifted their positions.   
The focus must be entirely on BFI's; and determining their positioning through 
the context of their footprints on the chart.   
We find it a bit interesting why the majority of the retail -minded 
traders pay such little respect or attention to these BFI market 
participants. The focus must be entirely on them, and determining 
the identity  of their  positions  through their  footprints .  

--- PAGE 70 ---
 
It is very normal to have some typ e of pullback or retracement after a 
strong footprint. How healthy or how deep? That depends on the 
appetite of the BFI's. In this case, just a few basing candles later, we 
have another footprint upwards that breaks the high of the base. This 
completes a f ull-cycle.  BUT WAIT! There's more.   
 
                                     
A market  over -extension  is an extended  additional cycle  that follows after one 
single buy -cycle.  


--- PAGE 71 ---
This does not always happen, but it often happens when the 
instrument is in a strongly trending environment and BFI's are 
starving. This is typically how BFI's push a pair  hundreds and 
hundreds  of pips, and we can understand this and tag along. Get 
more in -tune with the cycles and movement methods and shed off 
the thinking of straig ht up and down price -action to a target. The 
market moves in a very subtle way, and it needs to get things done 
and fulfill certain orders for certain market participants in certain 
pockets on the chart.   
 
The market retraces again after the second valid footprint and the 
completion of a buy -cycle;  footprint -base -footprint.  We have drawn 
the nearest buy -zone, which is a valid basing zone as labeled above.   


--- PAGE 72 ---
 
There is another valid basing zone below it; notice both have a heavy 
volume cluster gathered there . Which one will work? Who knows? 
Who cares? Are we here to predict or to react? A proper BFI trader 
draws the nearest valid buy -zone and handles it accordingly, with the 
understanding it is a middle basing -zone, as well as your new 
understanding of cycles  from this section.   


--- PAGE 73 ---
 
Whether the trader looks for a valid micro -signal (in the case of this 
4H range: we use a 15m entry candlestick signal confirmation), or 
uses a 4H signal to enter later on, both are valid methods that we 
discuss in more detail in the  next part,  Volume II: Entering . In this 
case, the setup is more optimal as price dips past the 50% level of the 
range and into the  deeper half ; a great low risk entry area.   
This was an example of clean  over -extension  in price. A complete 
buy-cycle, followed by another buy -cycle. This does not happen 
often, but in strong trending environments, look out for them and get 
positioned and systemized accordingly in terms of target -setting or 
stop -trailing. Trading is a messy game and the price -action can ge t 
messy as well. Your job is to make sense of what is going on today on 
your instrument. The sense of the  footprints  and their  directional 


--- PAGE 74 ---
tendencies , the  monthly  context and the  weekly  context, where 
price -action came  from  and where it is likely  headed ; all must be 
taken into account and understood properly . Did you think it was as 
easy as a click? Sure it is; but it will take many years of preparation 
and process so a trader can make it as easy as a click. Two traders can 
look at the same chart; but one s ees millions of trade ideas and 
opportunities, and the other may see none. Proper perspective takes 
years to develop, but stick to the BFI path and we can shortcut as 
much as possible.   
We have covered the basics of understanding the monthly bias; we have covered validating 
and understanding various footprints; and we have covered how to draw the origin of those 
footprints properly. We discussed the classic manipulation that occurs at these ranges at the 
first retest and understanding the various basing zon es that form within a market movement. 
In this section, we discussed how all these footprints play out in cycles that can extend and 
over -extend over short periods or long periods.   
 
You should have a solid understanding of the classic first retest opportu nity; and a rough idea 
of how price -action moves from zone to zone. As mentioned, Finding the opportunity is not 
enough; the trader must learn to enter the opportunity flawlessly.  
 
Now it is time to end this Volume I and begin Volume II: Entering Setups. I t is important to 
remember that all this analysis was performed on the timeframe on which the footprint was 
created. When it comes down to execution, it is advised that the trader move deeper and 
onto the execution timeframe for more precise execution.   
 
 
Volume II: Entering Setups   
The entry is typically done on the  execution timeframe.   
 
The macro -timeframe  ; range validation.   
The micro -timeframe  ; entry timing.   
The act of  Entering  a trading setup is an important one, but not as 
important as  Finding  it. Many enter in many ways but in the middle 
of nowhere.   First comes the validation of a price -range and price 

--- PAGE 75 ---
returning for a first -retest of the valid range. The entry now becomes 
a timing issue ; an issue of patience and knowing exactly how much 
patien ce is required. Do not confuse the analysis with the entry. The 
analysis is designed to help us enter the trading opportunity, 
but Finding it  and Entering it  are two separate steps to consider and 
treat them accordingly. You should already know where you'l l be 
entering long before you've gotten on your execution timeframe.   
Finding and validating a proper price -range is the analysis that tells us  "where"  to get 
active.  The valid entry signal confirmation  leads to execution, or 
the "when"  to get active.  
Avoi d the trap of trading without context; 
entering outside of valid price -ranges. The 
system only requires two confirmations:  
 
1. A return to a valid price -range;   
 
2. A valid entry signal that prints there.   
 
Your trading edge is present. No need for 
dozens of confirmations & validations;  two are 
more than enough confirmations for a proper 
trading edge (volume can be a third advanced 
confirmation).  
Some of you will enter after a valid signal prints, but outside of a valid range.   
 
Some of you will trade insid e of a valid range, but enter before the signal 
prints.   

--- PAGE 76 ---
 
Two requirements; not one. There are many ways self -sabotage unfolds; your 
job is to seek your edge and execute when it is presented and allow the 
probabilities of trading -in-a-series to play out.   
What are the requirements for an entry?  
Many traders are unable to answer these question simply.   An entry 
only requires a click; and we will use the term "click" and "clicking" to 
denote and simplify this idea of executing. A click will timestamp your 
entry and you are now exposed to the uncertainty of markets. A 
professional trader has an entry price, a stop price, and a target 
price;  three price levels.   
Trading Schools Of Thought  
There is an important point to be made here regarding these three 
price levels and this idea of flawless execution. Our BFI trading school 
of thought is based upon the idea that the best information available 
to us as small public retail individuals is the market structure; the 
candlesticks themselves.   
BFI TRADING SCHOOL OF T HOUGHT  


--- PAGE 77 ---
Whether it be entry price, stop price, or the target price; we base our decisions 
on the  market structure ; the  candlesticks .  
This is an important point because many traders use certain technical 
tools and indicators to help them identify a stop lev el, or an entry 
level. Some use the fib tool indicator to set targets, but the best 
information to base our decisions upon is the price action and the 
candlesticks. Most of the tools and indicators simply translate the 
price action and the candlesticks int o fancy shapes and lines; it is the 
job of the trader to be able to  read the language of the 
candlesticks  instead of using other indicators and tools as a crutch to 
help with the translating. Pure candlesticks and a clean naked chart; 
that is the BFI way o f analysis.   
Let us take a look at each of these three 
important price -levels:   
Which of the three price -levels is the hardest price -level to determine?  
The Entry -price?   The Stop -price?   The Target -price?  
Many may say that the ENTRY is the most important,  but any seasoned trader 
understands that the TARGET is the most subtle aspect of trading. The market 
structure tells us the stop -price, dependent on the entry -signal used. This entire 
volume discusses the multiple methods of entry tools, and in the next c hapter we 
will discuss the algorithmic entry theory so you can align potential entries within 
these certain algorithmic ranges. However, in trading, it is the target that is the most 
sensitive and that is what will take years to develop and refine and make  more 
accurate by taking advantage of what typically happens on your instrument as you 
become seasoned alongside it.   
Entry -price:   
There are many ways to finding an  entry -price . Markets give traders multiple 
opportunities to enter into any single trade id ea. The upcoming chapters discuss the 
various entry tools. Whether it be an entry based on a live reaction at the first -retest 
price -range, or a pending order that does not require live intervention. As we will 
see, some entry tools are aggressive while so me other entry tools are more 
conservative. There is no one -size-fits-all when it comes to timing an entry and 
executing.   

--- PAGE 78 ---
Stop -price:  
The stop -price  is based on market structure; whether it is placed above the zone 
or above the candlestick entry signal us ed, the method of entry determines this 
level. The size of stop -price is based on the price -action signal used. As we will see, 
each entry tool has a corresponding stop -price.   
Target -price:  
The target -price  is the most subtle number in flawless execution.  It is entirely 
dependent on you; but the market structure decides this level, and your entry -
timeframe may help decide this level. Read the original BFI Trading Course for more 
detailed information regarding targets and using volume and POC -levels as one of 
many ways to set them.   
Whenever we think of targets, we must be wired to immediately think of 
the monthly  chart. Targets have to do with the  potential  of the trade idea, and the 
monthly chart and its proper directional bias can help us identify the deg ree of 
potential and thus a reasonable target level. A bullish monthly bias means the longs 
are the High Probability Trade's, and should be held to further targets versus closer 
targets. A  macro -zone  trade idea should have targets set on the 
corresponding  macro -timeframe . Macro zone; Macro targets.  The micro -timeframe 
should not be used to identify target -prices. Use the micro -timeframe strictly for 
execution/entry.  
Next we will introduce the reader to the algorithmic entry theory that 
can be used to make t he entry -price's  more accurate.   
 
 The Algorithmic Ranges Entry 
Theory   
We all know the market moves by reacting to certain  price ranges , and not certain  price -levels . 
Of course there will be a certain price -level that creates the high or the low, but we have yet to 
discover the tools that can catch them. However, we can be aware of certain price ranges 
instead of focusing on some magic key price -level. From now on, you must think in  price -
ranges  and not a certain  price -level . We will see that it takes two  certain price -levels to create a 
range, and the focus is on  reacting within this range.   

--- PAGE 79 ---
The Number System:  
 
0       1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       0 
Let us highlight the middle:  
0       1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       0 
Let us highlight the middle again.   
0       1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9
       0 
From  0 to 0 , we have highlighted three equally distributed digits;  2, 5, 
and 8 . These are key algorithmic price levels. An algorithm is nothing 
but a set of computer instructions; BFI's trade using very efficient 
trading algorithms. These instructions activate within certain price 
ranges; the price range that the BFI's have pre -determined to be  a 
good -deal price -range to transact their business. Now let us see the 
price -ranges that are created and how we can take advantage of 
them.  
The amount that price tends to move within an algorithmic price 
range is dependent on the instrument. A healthy ran ge is 15 -20 pips. 
That means if the 80 level holds, the price may dip past the 80 level 
into the 60 level price -range. That means if the 50 level is holding, the 
price may dip past the 50 level and into the 30 level price -range. That 
means if the 20 level holds, the price may dip past the 20 level and 
into the 00 level price -range. Let us take a look at these ranges as 
applied to our instrument GJ.   

--- PAGE 80 ---
 


--- PAGE 81 ---
The three algorithmic ranges for the 153 -154 100 -tick price range.   
Now that we know the three levels within every 100 -tick price -range, 
we can begin to identify valid BFI first -retest price -range's and then 
look for the nearest algorithmic -entry range that may align with it; if 
any.   

--- PAGE 82 ---
 


--- PAGE 83 ---
Three potential scenarios; your job is to first find a valid BFI range, and then to look for the nearest algorithmic -
level. In the above case, since the 50 -level also aligns with our valid BFI range, signals that print within the 50 -30 
range are very significant.  
Your job is not to trade eve ry algorithmic -range. First you identify a 
valid BFI range using a valid BFI footprint; as described in Volume I of 
Finding Deals.   
 
If an algorithmic level aligns or is within your valid BFI price -range, 
then take that algorithmic level and its correspond ing algorithmic 
range, into consideration when price action enters this certain range. 
The original BFI price -range overrides any algorithmic -range. These 
levels just may make things more accurate when aligning both a zone 
with one of the three algorithmic  ranges. Candlestick -signal 
confirmations that print within a zone and within an algorithmic 
range should be taken seriously.   
Wicks Within Ranges   

--- PAGE 84 ---
 
A classic signal within an algorithmic -range; a bearish pinbar that gets engulfed. As soon as price penetr ates the 
80-level, we are looking to see whether a valid signal prints there; does the buying -power begin when price dips 
inside it?  


--- PAGE 85 ---
If price kept dropping and  penetrated the 50 -level ; then we would be 
looking at the 50 -30 range to see if it holds. Do not trade every 
algorithmic -range, but rather those that align with a valid BFI zone.   
The true power in using an algorithmic range to anticipate and refine 
your entry comes from aligning it only with proper and valid BFI 
ranges. Con text is key, and these algo rithmic -levels tell us very little 
alone; but when you have an algorithmic range like above, that also 
happens to align with the deeper -half of a valid BFI -range; then you 
may have a very high -probability setup.   
 
Even if the setup does not work, typically  there may be a small 
reaction at these levels and the trader is given a chance to go break -
even. Imagine if you could trade and trade, without a scratch? That is 
definitely possible when you learn to become a patient trader who 
waits like a sniper for the  perfect time when price does the perfect 
thing; to dip into a valid range that you have pre -established, and the 
time to act is now. Minimize exposure by trading not very often; and 
maximize reward by being patient and using smart and efficient 
targets.   
 
Now we will take a look at entry tool #1.   
 
 
Entry Type 1: 50% of Range  
Limit -Order  
Think of these various entry tools, like a hammer or a screwdriver 
and other various work -tools. Certain situations call for certain tools,  
and certain situations don't call for certain tools. There are some 

--- PAGE 86 ---
things in trading that cannot be taught. They can only be self -
learned.   
Who tells us which entry tool is best to use?   
The price -action reaction  at the zone.   
Let us take a look at entry  tool #1; the mid -point of a valid range. This 
is one of the most basic and laziest entry methods; but in this game 
you can get very rich if you're lazy in the right ways. This may be 
more suitable for a part -timer, but the suitability of each entry tool 
will be left to the user of the tool to decide. You do not need to 
master all of the tools at once, but see which entry tool you and your 
trading personality gravitate towards. Although the first two entry 
tools are limit -orders; these types of orders requi re patience and 
discipline and seasoning, because they require accuracy but can be 
powerful if understood.    
After the validation of the buy -range with the BFI footprint that broke 
previous market structure. Important institutions may have bought at 
that o rigin, and we may be able to ride alongside them if they decide 
to add and protect their initial positions when price returns to the 
buy-range for the first time.   

--- PAGE 87 ---
 
50% of Range; this entry -tool does not optimize for the highest risk -to-reward ratio's.  
Many have seen great success with trading half of the deeper half; or 
75% of the buy -range as shown below. Although this may lower the 
stop -loss size in pips, and thus increase the risk -to-reward ratio, there 
is one thing we must understand before we can s et our orders and 
live happily ever after.   


--- PAGE 88 ---
 
75% of Range; better risk -to-reward ratio, but you must still think in probabilities.   
If trading was that easy, then everyone would be a successful trader. 
This entry method is a proven successful entry tool i f played out 
across a series of valid trades implemented through a trader who 
thinks in probabilities. It is almost always an issue with the underlying 
worksman using the tool and not the tool itself.   
However, we are not here to argue whether or not these  entry tools 
work; we know and understand they do. But we need be pragmatic 
and understand the ways the entry -tool may fail or become 
invalidated.   
Many retail participants set their orders within the valid buy -range with a stop 
below the range; and then t hey wait for success. But BFI's also know that; and 
sometimes they make sure that retail participants and trading robots never live 
happily ever after.   


--- PAGE 89 ---
 
Your buy -range ends up working nicely; but you took a loss on a successful trading idea. Tough Luck.   
As we see above; sometimes price will shoot outside the range, but 
end up closing inside the range and being protected before another 
footprints occurs. We don't know many things that are tough luck 
besides a trade idea that works out beautifully but the trader was not 
along to catch the ride.   
Manipulation is part of the game. It is the cost of doing business in this industry.   
This is why a manual live -execution entry may work smoother than 
setting limit -orders at valid buy -ranges and hoping they work. S ure, 
they may work great; but the trader must have a back -up plan for this 
constant manipulation of zones and ranges that we see across all 
currency instruments dominated by BFI's.   
 
Let us look at the next entry -tool.   
 
 


--- PAGE 90 ---
 
Entry Type 2: 50% of Wick  
Limit Order   
This entry tool is based on a valid pinbar candlestick signal. You 
should already be aware of the  Rejecting vs Reaching  concept that is 
explained in the basic BFI Trading Course program that should be 
reviewed alongside this trading guide. A large wick should not be 
assumed to be rejecting that area of price action; but rather consider 
that price may be doing the opposite and attempting to  reach  that 
area and not  reject  it. In other words, wicks are neutral and they 
need to be validated and differen tiated in regards to reaching versus 
rejecting.  
 
 A valid pinbar must have a wick that is multiple times longer than the 
candle body; this is the basics of the definition of a pinbar 
candlestick. Not only that, but we need the pinbar to print  inside  the 
zone; not outside it or near it, or a light tap of it.   

--- PAGE 91 ---
 
Do not fall for the initial early tap on the right that barely enters the zone. Wait for price action 
to enter the zone and begin printing multiple candlesticks within, especially if price has 
penetra ted the mid -point of the range.   
These are examples of two great pinbar  candlesticks that have printed and penetrated the mid -
point of the range; in the lower cheaper half. It helps to respect candlestick confirmations that 
print below the mid -point of the range; instead of those that print above the mid -point of the 
range. A lthough the first initial candlestick is a valid signal and wick to use for a limit -entry, the 
second pinbar candlestick confirmation makes our setup much stronger. If a third pinbar wicks 
the same range; even stronger. A 50% limit on either pinbar wick tr iggered with minimal 
drawdown.   


--- PAGE 92 ---
 
Stop -Placement   
A conservative stop -placement is below the range.   
An aggressive stop -placement is below the wick.   


--- PAGE 93 ---
 
Differentiate between Aggressive vs Conservative SL Placement; below the pinbar candlestick vs 
below the  valid buy -range.  
In some cases where the buy -range is not manipulated beyond the 
range; a stop -placement below the pinbar wick is considerd 
aggressive. A stop -placement below the buy -range is considered 
conservative. Know yourself and understand what you are doing 
when executing. In the end, risk -reward is appealing but suffocating a 
trade with tight stop -placements is not so appealing.   


--- PAGE 94 ---
 


--- PAGE 95 ---
Next several candles should trigger the limit; printing of multiple pinbar wicks is preferred.  
Macro -Wick   VS  Micro -Wick  
 
What's the difference between an entry using 50% of a  macro  pinbar 
candlestick versus using the same entry on a  micro  pinbar 
candlestick? A 4H -range trader couples the 15min as their execution 
timeframe. Do you use a micro -15min pinbar wick or do you use a 
macro -4H pinbar wick? It depends on what the market prints and on 
your trading style and personality.   
A conservative  entry uses   4H or higher  pinbar candlesticks.   
An aggressive  entry is using pinbar candlesticks   below the 4H . 
There is no right or wrong; there is only the facts, and your 
positioning in relation to them. Understand whether or not you are 
able to handle using a 15min pinbar wick that may end up giving you 
a quick loss that most traders are not yet ready to realize . We do not 
use timeframes below the 15min. Sometimes the trader must 
consider the risk and the potential of the limit not to trigger. Weigh 
out the risk of the trade not triggering versus a current manual live -
execution entry at a slightly higher price.  
 
 
 
 
Entry Type 3:  Fibonacci  
Limit -Order or Live -Execution  
When BFI's transact a large amount of order -flow volume within a 
certain range, a BFI -footprint occurs from the origin. This is an A to B 
impulsive market movement, or more accurately labeled as a v alid 
BFI-footprint.   

--- PAGE 96 ---
 


--- PAGE 97 ---
An A to B impulsive market movement creates a classic valid BFI -footprint that breaks a 
previous market swing point.  
The heavy -volume  sideways price -action  before the move , results in  the not-so-
heavy -volume  A to B impulsive market movement.  
In currencies, things do not move in straight lines. There is a natural 
tendency for any A to B market movement to retrace, or to pull -back, 
a certain portion of the A to B movement. Although a retracement 
entry is essentially entering after the A to B is already over, it can still 
be used to either enter late or to add to existing positions taken at 
the origin of the A to B move, which likely originated from a valid BFI -
range.   
One of the worst times to enter is  AFTER  an A to B impulsive 
movement  has already printed. Your job is to enter at the first -retest 
of a valid range, and have the A to B market movement occur after 
being already positioned. We do not buy high, and after a strong BFI -
footprint, a retracement setup may potentially form. Eithe r 
enter  before  an A to B impulsive movement fully prints, or 
enter  after  a healthy retracement is likely complete.   
R 
Rarely do we enter  after  an upwards BFI -footprint completes;  wait for a 
retracement  or learn to be positioned at the origin with a first-retest.   
Understanding Retracement Ranges   
The first step in understanding this entry tool is in understanding the 
retracement and the depth of the retracement as a percentage of the 
A to B move. A retracement the returns to 50% of the A to B move is  
considered   a very healthy retracement and is usually something you 
can count on.   
Just like our algorithmic levels create a range of prices; the same 
applies to retracement -levels. There are only a few retracement -
levels that we need to focus on. Let us first begin with the 38.2% 
retracement level.   

--- PAGE 98 ---
When is the A to B impulsive move considered 
complete and the retracement has now begun?   
 
This is what we use the  38.2%  retracement level 
for. It is  not used for execution or entry. It is 
strictly used as a t iming -tool to help alert us as 
to when to begin labeling our various 
retracement ranges as the A to B impulsive 
move is likely over.   

--- PAGE 99 ---
 
When price returns and crosses the 38.2% retracement -range of an A to B movement; we can 
consider the A to B move complete and the retracement move now occurring.   
After price retraces back to the 38.2% level and crosses it, we have 
likely confirmed that the A to B move is complete, and the 
retracement entry tool may be implemented. Now let us look at the 
retracement -ranges that we may end up using for our potential 
ranges.   


--- PAGE 100 ---
 
The three retracement levels that matter.  
There are three important retracement levels that matter: 
the 50%  level, the  61.8%  level, and the  78.6%  level.   
 
This creates  two price -ranges ;  
 
from  the 50% - 61.8% ;  
 
and from the  61.8% -78.6% .  


--- PAGE 101 ---
 
The three retracement levels  that matter form the  two ranges  that matter.   
Let us take a look at each of these three retracement levels and 
briefly summarize each.   
50% Retracement Level: The Bank Level  
The 50% retracement level is the most commonly touched. It is the mid -point of the A to B 
move but more importantly it serves as a potential bank -level. Many programmatic buy -
functions that are behind the creation of the A to B move are triggered to  add-to-position  at 
the 50% level. It is an important level and must always be taken into consideration.   
61.8% Retracement Level: The Psychological Level   
The 61.8% retracement level originates from the studies of Leonardo Fibonacci 
from roughly one -thousand years ago. The golden ratio is about 1.618, and is known 
by the Greek letter Phi. There has been much study devoted to this ratio and level, 
and for purposes of simplicity, we will call it the  psychological  level. The golden ratio, 
upon which this level is based , can be found all over nature and is something every 


--- PAGE 102 ---
trader should look into. The great thing is that you do not need to understand its 
origins in order to be able to effectively use it.   
78.6% Retracement Level: The Over -Extension Level  
There is nothing too special about this level; besides the fact that we use as an 
over -extension level and it forms the floor of the second deeper retracement range: 
61.8% - 78.6%. If price penetrates beyond the  over -extension  level, then we may 
need to consider whether or  not the current move is a retracement or actually an 
impulsive market movement. Price closing beyond this point can be considered an 
invalidation of the retracement setup.   
 
 
 
A valid retracement -setup   with  both valid retracement -ranges labeled. We understand the initial range comprises 
the 50% - 61.8% range; and the deeper range comprises the over -extension range; 61.8% - 78.6%.   


--- PAGE 103 ---
The Most Important Component   
The most important component of this retracement setup is looking 
to the left of each retracement -range and making sure there is some 
kind of basing -zone or valid BFI range to the left. Our retracement 
methodology is to mainly based on filtering those setu ps that have a 
valid basing -zone to the left of our retracement -ranges.   
 
A valid basing -zone to the left aligns with both retracement -ranges; making a micro -candlestick signal that 
prints there a valid signal.   
It will always be some sort of basing -zone if there is a zone to the left. 
There could be two basing -zones or in this case one larger basing -
zone that aligns with both retracement ranges. The key is to make 
sure that there is some sort of bank -level that also aligns with one of 


--- PAGE 104 ---
the two retracement -ranges. If that black candlestick that created the 
basing -zone to the left did not exist and the impulsive A to B move 
was all green candlesticks; then that would be a major difference and 
such a setup becomes invalid.   
Make sure a valid  basing -zone  aligns  with the retracement -range that you are 
using; this is what makes the retracement setup probable and valid.   
What timeframe do we use to find these 
A to B impulsive movements?  
It depends; but I recommend using 4H impulsive movements or 
higher. Refrain fro m using 1H retracements and lower.   
Something To Watch Out For  
A common occurrence with these types of retracement setups is the 
following.   

--- PAGE 105 ---
 
This shows an example of the [50% -61.8%] ; 
and usually price may have a reaction from this 
price range. But what builds up below every low 
and above every high?  LIQUIDITY.  
Liquidity  is just another term for order -flow volume that sits within a certain 
price range.  
ABC Reminder:  
There are only two types of orders; buy -order and sell -order.   
A buyer -SL is a sell -order.  A seller -SL is a buy -order.   
Sometimes price reacts to the 50% - 61.8% only to return lower and 
attack the liquidity that formed below the recent low. This is called 
an over -extension.  


--- PAGE 106 ---
 
Over -extension scenario; sometimes the price -action may over -extend and give you an even better entry price.   
Some traders may take a valid micro -candlestick signal confirmation 
entry within the first range. Risk -free or not; the trader understands 
that th e price is over -extending and now the focus becomes on the 
61.8% - 78.6% retracement -range. Even that range could fail, but 
your job is to look for a valid candlestick signal entry confirmation on 
the micro -timeframe; such as an engulfing signal or a pinba r signal, 
within a valid retracement -range.  


--- PAGE 107 ---
Let us take a look at the next Entry Tool 4; the 
liquidity run.   
 
 
Entry Type 4: The Liquidity 
Run 
Limit -Order or Live -Execution  
This entry tool is a special one because it is especially common in the 
spot -currency trading markets. The  Liquidity Run  entry -tool can serve 
as a trading strategy in itself. It could be used at anytime on any 
timeframe. First, let us take a look at this term "liquidity" and 
understand that is just an area where a group of ord ers are sitting; 
below a low or above a high.   

--- PAGE 108 ---
 


--- PAGE 109 ---
One single swing point; significant since this is a 4H swing point.   
A market swing point:   
In essence, a swing point requires a series of candles moving 
downwards, and then a series of candles moving upwards, that create what 
is known as a market reversal, or a "u -turn". If this was a 15min low, it would 
not have much significance. Since this is a 4H low, there is more liquidity 
sitting below the low and the setup probability increases when we use a 
higher timeframe.   
 
TWO swing points; very significant; typically a range of liquidity forms below.   
Two market reversals made from the same level; the support -buyers 
are enjoying themselves and the market knows it. Notice that the 


--- PAGE 110 ---
<50p range is dependent o n the instrument; some USD pairs are 
tighter.   
Dreams Usually Don't Come True  
Unfortunately, the market usually does not take off into infinity after 
such a scenario is created.   
 
That would be nice.   
Spot -currency markets are the most manipulated; so our approach 
must have manipulation as an expected part of the system that we 
depend upon. Any trader who was taken the basic BFI Trading Course 
understands that BFI's require liquidity. BFI's can also aff ord to 
engineer their own liquidity. We also know that BFI's always buy low 
and sell high; never the opposite. The world must be selling, in order 


--- PAGE 111 ---
for the BFI's to be able to accumulate heavily.   Now is not the time to 
hope and pray price goes straight up,  but rather to identify your 
range of liquidity that may be attacked; and be ready and prepared 
to be positioned if necessary.   
 
The moment of truth unfolds; and price penetrates the range that is heavily packed with sell -OFV; that has 
gotten absorbed. A very significant 4H bullish pinbar candlestick prints.   


--- PAGE 112 ---
 
A classic liquidity run (a sell -program) is performed  before  a major upwards impulsive market movement can 
occur.  
Whether the entry signal is taken on this 4H timeframe, or whether or more micro -entry is 
taken on the corresponding 15min micro -timeframe, there are multiple methods to 
benefiting from the occurrence of a liquidity run, and the entry timeframe depends on the 
trader.    
 
 
 
 
 Entry Type 5: Manual Micro  


--- PAGE 113 ---
Live Execution Only   
Any valid BFI zone or range is validated with a BFI footprint that 
prints on the macro -timeframe; the timeframe used for the analysis 
of the instrument. This entry tool is strictly used and based on the 
micro -entry timeframe. This entry tool should be the main entry 
method practiced by manual traders.   
The macro -timeframe is used for analysis: the WHERE; a valid price range.   
The micro -timeframe is used for execution: the WHEN; a valid entry signal.  
4H macro coupled with 15m micro. 1W macro coupled with 4H micro.  
An Engu lfing Candlestick Signal   
The engulfing candlestick is a classic micro candlestick signal confirmation to 
be taken seriously especially at the deeper half of a valid range. Notice here 
that a  bearish pinbar  is what is engulfed;  the candle being engulfed  should 
also be considered, along with the entire signal as a whole.  Context  is 
key;  look for a  micro -signal  to print within your  macro -zone .  

--- PAGE 114 ---
 
Entry and Stop Placement   
A Pinbar Candlestick Signal   
The pinbar  is the most important signal of our lifetime. When this prints 
within a valid BFI -range, it is significant. When multiple pinbars wick 
somewhat of the same area, this makes the candlestick signal confirmation 
even stronger. Notice how the first pinbar est ablishes a deep range. Notice 
the second pinbar that prints which could not break the previous candle 
low, but did break the previous candle high. The same occurs again for the 
next third pinbar candlestick. These are all great bullish signals.   


--- PAGE 115 ---
 
Entry and Stop Placement   
Sometimes this entry can be used to locate an entry signal outside a 
valid -range. Although this is not recommended, a manual trader can 
use a micro -candlestick signal confirmation to enter in many ways 
manually based only off the signal  itself. However, the BFI strategy is 
based on finding the right location on a chart; a valid BFI first -retest 
range, and also waiting for a micro -signal confirmation to print there.   
 Bonus Entry Method   
Sometimes price prints a very strong signal at a va lid price range. For 
example, a very strong bullish engulfing signal may skew the size of 
the stop -placement and thus the risk -to-reward ratio.   


--- PAGE 116 ---
 
Sometimes the market presents a bullish engulfing signal that would cause for a wider stop placement and 
mayb e a smaller risk -to-reward ratio setup.   


--- PAGE 117 ---
Instead of entering with an average entry after the engulfing signal 
prints, learn to use a professional entry like a limit -order placed at 
50% of the engulfing candle body.   
A buy limit -order placed at 50% of the e ngulfing candle body can give a better 
risk-to-reward ratio trade idea.   

--- PAGE 118 ---
 
A better entry at 50% of the engulfing candle body reduces our stop -placement by 40% (from 25p to 15p). That 
definitely helps improve our risk -to-reward ratio for this trade idea.   
The next candle triggers our entry. Usually those type of trade ideas 
end up working the best.   


--- PAGE 119 ---
 


--- PAGE 120 ---
 


--- PAGE 121 ---
A professional and patient entry pays off. Add this method to your 
toolset and learn to use it at the right time.   
 
 
 
Proper Pyramiding Process   
What is pyr amiding?   
Pyramiding a trade consists of taking multiple  safe  entries on a single trade idea.  
Let us take a look at a trade example that shows a risk of 15p for a 
target of 60p; a 1:4 risk to reward ratio. The risking of $1 to for the 
potential to make $4.  That may be a deal worth taking and it is 
perfectly reasonable and plausible off a 4H/15m macro -micro trade 
setup.   
The initial first  entry  

--- PAGE 122 ---
 


--- PAGE 123 ---
This is not an example of pyramiding an A to B price movement. This 
is one single entry and that is perfectly fin e for most beginners and 
some set -&-forget methodologies. The process to proper pyramiding 
requires  work ; AKA  time and energy . It requires the trader to be 
more active on the chart and to tag alongside the price -action and 
the A to B move itself from start  to finish.   
Two Important Steps To Pyramiding:  
1. Zero -Exposure  
(on initial)  
This means moving SL to an entry level for zero -exposure.   
2. Additional  
(with stop -placement at initial)  
This additional entry requires proper timing.  
In this simple example of pyramiding, we will assume an additional 
entry every 15 ticks, as we move towards our same initial target.   
A second  additional entry:  

--- PAGE 124 ---
 


--- PAGE 125 ---
The first position is risk -free and the second position has a stop -
placement at the level of the initial -entry. Notice how a proper and 
accurate initial entry makes things much smoother in the future. A 
bad initial entry makes things much more difficult in the future and 
may result in an expensive failed process. This second position gives 
roughly an additional 1:3 setup.   
A third  additional entry:  
 


--- PAGE 126 ---
This third position gives us roughly a  1:2 trade setup. Notice that as 
we get closer to the target, the risk increases and the risk -to-reward 
ratio's decrease. But the focus behind pyramiding is to make the 
most out of any sing le A to B price movement, whether it be a 60 tick 
movement as shown or much larger. The key is in understanding the 
principles behind the process and the power of  minimizing the risk 
and maximizing the reward , in the little time that you have with your 
instrument during your one trading session.   
The same price movement on the same pair; the same SL size; the same target;  
But one trade idea netted a 1:4, while the same trade idea netted someone else a [1:4 + 1:3 + 
1:2] = a 1:9 risk -to-reward trade setup fro m the same simple 60 tick  
 A to B price movement.   
 
Even if the trade idea does not work out; a trader needs one of them to work out to then  be 
able to afford  9 trade ideas in a row that fail. A proper trader who thinks in probabilities and 
properly pyrami ds the A to B impulsive movements that occur on their pair has no time to 
worry about losses. Those who are worried about the trades that do not work simply aren't 
making enough on the trades that do end up working.   
Why Most Fail At This Process:   
Mainly due to inexperience and greed; but the are many reasons as 
to why this may not be working smoothly and it should be quite 
obvious. Most are not yet seasoned enough with the basics before 
they are able to fluently do this simple yet difficult process . 
Outside Valid Ranges/Middle of nowhere  
The quickest way to make a great deal of charitable contributions in 
markets is to attempt to properly pyramid A to B movements that 
occur outside of valid BFI ranges. Read the original BFI Trading Course 
for more information regarding proper pyramiding an d "where" this 
type of trading should be performed. It is only in certain pre -
determined places where this may have the best probability of 
results, and not anywhere on a chart as most charts are moving 
sideways and not trending seventy percent of the time . That means 

--- PAGE 127 ---
only a quarter of the time consists of times that actually matter and 
maybe times where you should be active.   
Smaller timeframes  
The lowest timeframe used for this proper pyramiding process is the 
15min timeframe. Smaller timeframes will rare ly make a huge 
difference in your success as a trader. Leave the smaller timeframes 
for the seasoned trader or for those who have sold their souls to the 
markets and need that smaller timeframe validation. As the 
timeframe becomes smaller, the accuracy dec reases and noise 
increases. As the timeframe becomes larger, the accuracy increases 
and the noise decreases. Some retail -participants will need a few 
years to make this realization and that is just the way things are.   
Stop -placement suffocation  
It does no t matter if you the best trade idea unfolds itself live in front 
of you; if the trade will be sabotaged by being suffocated due to 
improper care or over -care by the owner of the position. Few things 
hurt more than a trade idea that works out beautifully bu t we are 
unable to benefit from the occurrence. This is due to an underlying 
emotional problem and maybe Dr. Phil or Oprah can give you better 
guidance regarding "why" you attempt to always give the trade less 
room than it needs. This takes many years of s easoning and the 
market decides the stop -placement and not your own hopes and 
emotional tendencies.  
 
Take a step back and understand the seasoning process of trading:  
 
Year 1:   35p SL ;    0p TP  
Year 2:   30p SL ;    20p TP  
Year 3:   25p SL ;    40p TP  
Year 4:   20p SL ;    60p TP  
Year 5:   15p SL ;    80p TP  

--- PAGE 128 ---
Year 6:    etc. etc. etc.   
 
Your level of seasoning decides what the typical  risk-to-reward 
ratio  setup you will likely receive. The best mentor is your trading 
history; let it tell you if this certain stop -size is too tight. A trader 
must learn to consistently  get paid 1:3's, 1:4's, and 1:5's on a 
consistent basis first ; in order to pad up their accounts and to 
develop that confidence that will allow them to endure through the 
years as their stop -placements  beco me tighter naturally  and their 
targets used become more accurate and  become further naturally . 
You need to learn to pocket a consistent simple setup; and be able to 
master that in your sleep. There is no "skipping" in this game; master 
the fundamentals wit h a single basic entry to a single basic target; 
before pyramiding or doing anything else.   
Bad Timing of Additional Entry's  
The above example is an over -simplification of this process. An 
additional entry every fixed -amount tick -movement is not the most 
efficient way to pyramid a trade idea. There are various methods and 
signals that can be used to get an idea of proper timing of additional 
entry's. One method is the  break -and-retest  type of market 
movement that occurs often on a 15min chart as shown in th e 
example below.   

--- PAGE 129 ---
 
A break of the previous high, followed by a retest of that level. The process is simple; but 
finding the proper context for performing it is not.   
We do not have an exact reason that explains why this happens as 
price moves from zone to zone, especially as price exits the zone. This 
break of a previous swing point and then a retest of that swing point 
is seen often as price finally exits a valid zone . Price action becomes 
messier the further you get from the zone, so it is essential in proper 
pyramiding to unload entry's within an early and narrow pip -range.   


--- PAGE 130 ---
 
15min break and retest price action as price leaves a valid buy -zone  
The number one key in the proper pyramiding process is never to increase the risk; but rather 
to keep the risk the same and only having an additional entry when the initial entry has no 
exposure. Accumulate your entry's safely, and without increasing your total net exposure.   
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 131 ---
 Volume III: Leaving Setups  
Introduction  
Here we are now reaching the final part and the most important 
volume in this series. We stress very often that both the ability to 
find a trade opportunity and the ability to enter a trade opportunity 
become absolutely useless if self -sabotaging behaviors are allowed to 
happen and disaster occurs post -click. Let us take a major step back. 
Trading is as complicated as you make it out to be. It can be simple, if 
you learn to make it simple.   
Let us quickly recap  the first two volumes of this simple BFI guide. 
Before we can let a trade idea play out, first we need find the trade 
idea and then find a way to enter that trade idea.   

--- PAGE 132 ---
 
A valid 4H footprint prints; a potential opportunity has presented itself.  
First we  need to identify a valid BFI footprint; an impulsive market 
movement that breaks a previous market swing point. Notice that 
although one single previous market swing point that breaks suffices 
as a valid BFI footprint; but they come in many different shad es and 
strength. A larger number of previous market swing points that break 
makes the footprint much strong. Also, the way the market breaks 
the previous swing point is also significant.   


--- PAGE 133 ---
 
The way price breaks a 4H swing point is significant; does it break with a 4H candle -body or does it break with a 
4H candle -wick? Does it break and close above, or does it break and quickly reverse? Every footprint on every 
timeframe is unique like a finge rprint.  
Where is the opportunity?   
At the origin of the footprint. Let us properly draw the zone now that 
we have validated the movement. We will use the low of the origin, 
and the base of that candle that formed the low. Reference the BFI 
Trading Course f or more information regarding properly drawing 
valid first -retest price -ranges; both undersized and oversized ones.   


--- PAGE 134 ---
 
This is a classic example of the setup of a potential opportunity. Will the BFI's who created the 
A to B impulsive footprint protect and add to their initial position if price were to return to 
that price range?   
The only question that matters: Will BFI add/protect their position?   
Yes?  There will be another footprint that prints that breaks another previous 
market swing point.   
No? The original first -retest price -range will be invalidated as price closes below 
it. 


--- PAGE 135 ---
 
BFI's either add and protect; or they get out of the way. The reaction at the first -retest price -
range is all that matters and it will be clear as to what is happening.   
We'v e Arrived at the First -Retest;   
Time to get to work (maybe)  
 
We say maybe because it is a very important maybe. This is an 
example of a valid 4H buy -range; but that does not mean every valid 
range is taken and traded. Many traders do not understand this 
filtration process in trading because unfortunately they most likely 
suffer from over -trading. We seek valid footprints in order to study 
the reactions at their first -retests; and from those valid buy -ranges 
that we discover and identify, we then again have to filter these valid 
buy-ranges further down into valid buy -ranges in which valid signal 
confirmations have printed within the range.   


--- PAGE 136 ---
Remember; this strategy is for those seeking the  low-hanging fruits  on their one 
trading instrument. The majority of the  time is spent validating a footprint and 
waiting for price to return to its origin. It takes great skill to be in the right place and 
at the right time; that is a trader's job.   
Macro entry -signal or Micro entry -signal?  
Let us study the reaction at the fi rst-retest of this valid buy -range and 
look for both a valid macro -signal (a 4H candlestick confirmation) and 
a valid micro -signal (a 15m candlestick confirmation.   
 
The initial price -dip into the zone. This is a tricky point and it is considered an early  stages of 
the reaction at the zone. This is not the time to quickly execute out of fear of missing out. 
These are psychological concerns that we may address later.  
This is a tense situation for many traders but it should not be. In 
trading, you are better  off late rather than early. This is definitely not 
"late" and this is definitely considered "early". The 4H situation is 


--- PAGE 137 ---
a  bearish candle that dips into the zone with a small reaction closing 
the candle with a slight wick. Notice that the 50% level was t ouched 
lightly for the first time. Let us take a look at the micro -situation; the 
15m chart.   

--- PAGE 138 ---
 


--- PAGE 139 ---
The 15min situation at this point; some could argue that a micro -engulfing pattern has 
printed.   
It is not a bad idea at this time to wait for a few more macro candles 
to print so we can get a better idea as to what is the honest reaction 
at this buy -range.   
 


--- PAGE 140 ---
The 4H does not look very exciting for the buyers; a couple indecision pinbars print and now a 
bearish pinbar has printed. Notice that liquidity is now bui lding up below this newly created 
market low.   
 
This is the 15min situation; a major thing to notice is that the liquidity building up below the 
newly formed low, happens to coincide with the deeper half, or better -deal half, of this price -
range. This makes the likelihood of the attack of the liquidity and price -penetration into the 
deeper portion of the zone much more likely. Think about it as two -birds -one-stone scenario.   
Even for those who took an early micro -entry signal (no macro -entry 
signal has printed yet), they have the opportunity to go risk -free in 
case the market properly penetrates the deeper half of the range. 
This is the risk of being early, and going risk -free sooner rather than 
later may be a better approach to early -top-half-of-range a ggressive 
style of trading.   


--- PAGE 141 ---
What does  TIME FOR ACTION  look like?  
In the below image, this depicts the perfect time for a potentially 
great trading opportunity. The price is now in the deeper half of the 
range, and many retail participants are fearful of b uying; this is one of 
many things that we look for. The retail confirmation is used to 
ensure that we do not buy high and sell low like many retail 
participants. If the average retail mind sees the buy -setup as very 
risky and scary, then we as BFI traders need to take into 
consideration that the buy -setup may be the proper thing to execute 
upon.   
 
This image of the 4H chart screams OPPORTUNITY. Going onto your micro execution 
timeframe would not be a bad idea.  


--- PAGE 142 ---
Let us take a look at this exact moment on the  15min chart:   
 
The 15min chart also shows a great depiction of trading opportunity. Notice the valid micro 
signal that has printed; and notice that the fact that the engulfing patterns engulfs a bearish 
pinbar, makes the engulfing buy -signal much stronge r.  
A few more macro -candlesticks later, the macro entry signal 
confirmation prints for those macro -traders looking for a macro entry 
signal. This is a much more  conservative  approach, as most traders 
should focus on finding a valid micro -signal on their e ntry timeframe, 
that prints within a valid price -range on their macro -analysis 
timeframe. Leave the macro for range -identification and leave the 
micro for the more precise entry signal.   


--- PAGE 143 ---
 
A valid entry opportunity presents itself on the macro -timeframe. A bearish pinbar that gets 
engulfed on the 4H macro timeframe is a very significant buy -signal.   
The only thing that matters:  will another 
footprint occur?   
The price -range is either protect ed or it is not. We do not take it 
personal.  


--- PAGE 144 ---
 
BFI's added and protected and created another footprint.    
Did the trader react and position themselves 
safely and properly at the first -retest reaction 
that occurred? This is the question that matters 
and thi s is the question that only the trader's 
actions can answer. This is a game of reacting; 
at the right time and at the right places and in 
the right ways and with the right position sizing. 
It is a  difficult  skill to acquire but one worth 
having.   
Conclusion  
The are many valid BFI footprints that occur on all financial 
instruments across all markets. Price often returns to the origin of 
these footprints for a first -retest of the origin. There are various 
entry methods that can be applied to execute and enter into that 


--- PAGE 145 ---
trade idea, at the right time. A valid micro -signal prints at a valid 
macro -zone? Welcome to your trading edge. Let us dig deeper into 
what happens post -click.   
 
 
 
 Consistency  
This term " consistency " is thrown around often in the tradi ng world. 
To us, it is a state of mind. In this chapter we will define this term and 
what it means to us as BFI traders looking for BFI trades.   It is a 
mental threshold; not a physical one. It is a psychological threshold 
that takes many years to break th rough and into.   
A trader that repeatedly risks 10p to make 10p is a 
consistent  1:1 trader; but is that the  kind  of consistency that you 
seek?   
Whenever we speak of  consistency , we must speak of the 
term  efficiency  as well. A proper trader seeks an efficient form of 
consistency; one in which they minimize their risk and maximize their 
reward, with as little effort as possible. A  1:1 trader  needs three 
successful trade ideas to work out until completion, to equal one 
successful trade idea from a  1:3 t rader . In other words, there are 
different kinds of consistency and there are different levels of 
efficiency for each.   
As we saw in the last section of Volume II, the Proper Pyramiding 
Process; we were able to turn a 1:3 trade into a 1:9 trade; using the 
same price -movement and target. This greatly increases the 
efficiency of your trading by making the winning trades many 
multiple times larger than any single losing trade idea. This is the only 
way proper trading works; when the trader consistently closes high 

--- PAGE 146 ---
risk-to-reward ratio setups and maintains and continues to minimize 
their losing trade ideas. It is very difficult to survive trading when 
most of the trading ideas consist of  1:1, 1:2, or 1:3  trading setups. If 
the next trade idea does not work out, and you take a couple valid re -
entry signals, and they still fail, then that opens up the door to slave -
labor; working for free. A minimum wage job would have been more 
profitable.   
A state of mind  
As stated earlier, consistency in trading is a state of mi nd; a 
confidence state of mind. This means the trader understands their 
potential; they understand what they are able to do and what they 
are not able to do. This rare level of extra self -awareness is what 
makes a great trader. They understand the market e nvironment they 
are currently operating in. They understand the potential setup that 
is unfolding on their instrument and they have historical reference as 
to proper target placement. The monthly context is known and never 
leaves the mind. The weekly conte xt and ranges are known and the 
situation on the 4H is also identified. The state of mind of consistency 
allows the trader to become automatic and effortless; because by 
now they have a proper process and set of rules of operation that 
very little is left to chance and indecision. Things are all pre -defined 
and pre -decided; this creates the confidence required to operate, 
and thus consistency becomes habitual.   
Conclusion  
There are many methods and paths to getting towards consistency 
and it will be differe nt for each trader. All the chapters in this volume 
combined will help the trader understand and achieve this it. Do not 
get stuck over the term and those who focus on a proper trading 
process to implement will gain the confidence in their system and 
then they will discover consistency will occur automatically. A proper 
process and the proper profits take care of themselves.   

--- PAGE 147 ---
 
 
 
Systems   
There is no trading without systems; just like there is no driving 
without education and licensing. Unfortunately in the retail trading 
world there is no licensing. Although there does exist regulatory 
bodies within each country for certain financial industries, almost 
anybody can enter as there is no barrier to market; everyone's 
liquidity is welcome.   
The unfortunate part is that most traders operate without any sort of 
system or systems. For many retail participants, trading is emotional 
and not systemized. In fact, random trading would have better 
results, because some entries are good and some are entries are bad. 
But wh en emotions come in and there is no system, the trader is 
likely to consistently make the wrong decision. It is almost as if 
beginner traders are skilled at doing the wrong thing in markets. 
Some strategies based off a simple coin -flip would be more profit able 
than many retail participants today.   
Different kinds of systems   
Trading Edge System  
(tells you when an opportunity is present)  
A valid micro -signal that prints at a valid macro -zone?  A trading edge is present and that is the 
system that tells us when to become active.  
Profit System  
(tells you when and how to get paid)  
Although one of the most basic profit systems is to close out an entire trade idea at one single 
target.  But a profit system consists of a target price, and the amount the trading is willing to pocket 
if price arrives there.   

--- PAGE 148 ---
Your Trading System / Edge   
This entire guide is based on explaining the BFI trading edge; using 
only two simple confirmations or gree nlights; a valid micro -signal 
printing at a valid macro -range. Those two are just enough to achieve 
a proper and scalable trading edge. While many retail participants are 
wired to predict an outcome, BFI traders must learn to be wired to 
react to first -retest price -ranges. We cannot predict which ranges will 
work and which will not; that is not your duty. The job is to execute 
when the trading edge presents itself, and across a series of ten or 
twenty trades conducted in the same way using the same system, 
you'll gain the favorable odds in your edge.   
 
The acquisition of proper Risk -to-reward ratio trade ideas is a 
powerful trading process that is designed to take care of itself. The 
true concern in trading is not that the vehicle does not drive properly; 
but that the driver does not have the proper driving capabilities yet 
and usually hops on a financial instrument and drives it into a tree.   
 
Of course there are many more confirmation methods a trader can 
include for their trading edge, but that is outside the scope of this 
simple guide. Some additional confirmations include using VOLUME; 
an confirming an area or origin of heavy -volume activity because 
most traders should not be active in low -volume trading 
environments. Larger volume and larger volatility a re what proper 
traders desire. Order -flow volume of centralized currency futures 
that enter centralized exchanges can be read tick -by-tick, and that 
can be combined with the corresponding spot -FX currency pair for 
confirmation. The 6A (Australian Dollar)Fu tures contract on the CME 
provides order -flow data that can be combined with the spot -FX pair 
AUDUSD. Most traders are not ready yet for this additional 
confirmation and it is not necessary for success.   

--- PAGE 149 ---
Your Profit System   
Some trading systems have method s of getting paid that are very 
intricate and complex and we will leave all those aside for now. If you 
cannot manage to attain simplicity in your manual trading operations 
as a manual BFI trader, then there is no hope for moving further on 
and elevating t o more advanced and more difficult levels.  
Where?  
a pre -defined  price -level   
This is just a price -level; a target price. There are many methods to finding an accurate target price.   
How much?  
a pre -defined  %-level   
We cannot allow the trade to arrive to its pre -defined target but then begin a stage of indecision as 
to "how much" of the trade idea to keep alive.   
A BFI trader that enters at a certain price, and has pre -defined their 
target level, that plans to close the entire trade idea at that target 
level, has a valid profit system. Where? At this price level. How 
much? All of it. That is a system.   
 
A BFI trade r that sets a pre -defined target at which they will close 
half the trade idea and leave the remaining half to run to a further 
pre-defined target (T2), has a valid profit system.   
 
A BFI trader that sets a higher timeframe swing target and decides to 
close  0% of their trade idea, and instead trails their stop -placement 
on a 4H chart, has a valid profit system.   
 
There are many methods to finding the right profit system that fits 
your trading personality and also your trading pair and 
circumstances. Avoid en tering into the markets without having a pre -
defined target as to where it may be headed, because then that 
means the risk -to-reward ratio cannot be calculated if we cannot 

--- PAGE 150 ---
decide and depend on a reliable target. Do not leave things up to 
hope and prayer i n the BFI markets. The yacht that sets sail without a 
destination tends to end up in the middle of nowhere.   
Systems can be split into sub -systems. For 
example, your profit system can use a trailing 
aspect and that trailing -stop placement has its 
own syste m and settings. Some programs can 
be used to hide your stop placement; such as a 
program that is designed to take you out of a 
trading idea at a certain price, without the 
broker or the market having to know where 
that stop placement level is.   
 
 
 
 Routine  
Trading is all about routine. The different chapters of this volume will 
help you to help yourself regarding the various different key 
elements required in this trading puzzle. We will put aside a routine 
for life, as that is a question better addressed t o Dr. Phil. This is a 
trading guide and we must keep it strictly trading -related.   
A trading routine  
One Instrument  

--- PAGE 151 ---
Every trader is different, but most BFI traders should be similar. 
Similar in the way they've structured a trading routine. That means 
they have  one trading pair  that they've been monitoring alone for 
years. This develops the ticker -sense required for seasoned traders to 
achieve an efficient form of consistency. The difference between a 
year one trader and year ten trader is their level and st rength of 
ticker -sense regarding their one instrument.   
Master one trading instrument before attempting to play the entire financial 
orchestra.  
One Session   
Another similarity is in the fact that each BFI trader has one very 
specific  trading session  that they are very familiar with. This is 
because each trading session is different based on the market 
participants available and transacting during that time -period.   
 
Notice the timing of the typical trading day. Depending where you 
are in the world, Australian markets open in Sydney followed by 
Japan which call the Asian session. Towards the end of the Asian 
session, the London markets open and the London session begin s. 
This is where the majority of the currency volume throughout the 
world is transacted; in the London session. Towards the middle of the 
London session, New York opens and we begin the New York session. 
A few hours after New York markets open, London mark ets to begin 
to close. This leads us to what we believe is the best trading session; 


--- PAGE 152 ---
the London -NY overlap, when both London banks and NY banks are 
open for business.   
Do not complicate this idea of your certain trading session. Obviously 
the best trading session is when most of the major banks are open 
for business, and the worst trading session is when most of the major 
banks are closed for business. Your lifestyle and daily schedule do not 
leave much room for options regarding which session to be active in.  
Master one trading session before attempting to trade multiple trading 
sessions.  
Fit your trading session into your daily lifestyle; do not fit your daily lifestyle into 
trading. A one or two hour session is more than enough per trading day; not every  
day is a trading day, and not every week is a trading week.   
One Fixed Lot Size  
This is a debatable topic, but unfortunately we do not have the time 
to debate it. Your position size is the most important thing in trading; 
more important than your entry pr ice. Proper calculation of a 
position size is outside the scope of this course, but what we can tell 
you is that position sizing a slow and steady journey of mental -
growth and expansion, alongside your analytical skills. A standard lot 
is 1.00, and a mini lot is 0.10, and a micro lot is 0.01. A proper trader 
understands that they need to catch simple and basic A to B price 
movements using a simple micro -lot before they can imagine 
catching the same price movements using mini -lots or standard -lots. 
The volum e of the position -sizing is dependent on your trading skill -
level. Your duty is to use a position size large enough where any 
winning ideas are meaningful, but small enough so that the losing 
ideas are not bothersome and the calm clarity of vision is 
maint ained.   
The position sizing volume is related to the skill -level; it is likened to a muscle 
and dropping a few hundred pounds of weight on a beginner can crush them like a 
pancake.   

--- PAGE 153 ---
 
Proper position -sizing is like walking a tightrope, and the larger the p osition size, the more delicate and 
professional it must be handled.   
It helps if the BFI trader has a pre -defined lot size that they are 
comfortable with alongside which they are familiar with its up -and-
down fluctuations. We hope your lot size grows steadily as your 
balance grows steadily, and your comfort level maintains constant 
and not emotionally vol atile alongside it all.  
 
 
 The Fluid State of Mind  
What is a fluid state of mind when it comes down to trading?  


--- PAGE 154 ---
 
The rarest species on the planet is  a fluid trader. Fluidity is a 
requirement for proper trading; meaning it is impossible to succeed 
without it. Defined above as "the ability of a substance to flow 
easily"; the substance is the trader, and flowing with ease will take 
many years. It is one thing to trade in flow, but it is something else 
to easily  trade in and out of flow.   
 
Unfortunately, we are not able to stay in flow eight hours per day and 
five days per week. Think of it as the Olympics, and all the training 
you've done is to extract pe ak performance from yourself for only a 
short period of time. Short periods of intense effort, using the 
operating system the trader has clearly laid out for their trading 
session. A few hours a day at the right time, using a system that helps 
you to " know  what you're looking for "(valid first retests). This entire 
program is devoted to helping the trader understand exactly what it 


--- PAGE 155 ---
is they should be looking for on their trading instrument, followed 
with methods for entering the opportunity after what they ha ve been 
looking for prints on their screens.   
Be rigid  in your  methodology , but  fluid  in your  approach . 
Know your rules and your approach. Know your methodology. Know 
your trading boundaries. Define for yourself a trading loss limit, 
whether it be in percentage or in fixed dollar amount.   
 
Five losses in a row? Maybe call it a  day.  
Ten losses in a row? Maybe call it a  week .  
 
As we say, creating and designing trading rules is fun and exciting; 
learning to  follow  them is  not. It takes many years for a trader to see 
what works for themselves through trial and error. Sure, they can 
copy, but they need to believe in what they are doing before they can 
be able to apply it effortlessly and thus enter the trading flow state. 
The trader must believe, from the bottom of their hearts, that their 
rules and boundaries and limits are there to protect them and they 
actually enjoy following them.   
 
Remember, we try to focus on rules and boundaries to protect us 
from the downside. The professional trader understands th at if they 
worry about protecting the downside, the upside will take care of 
itself. The trader must first learn the basics of capital preservation 
before they can dream about capital growth. Keep the losses under 
control;  learn to hate them , by not multip lying them and keeping 
them small and controlled; and  learn to respect them , because they 
are a cost of doing business. It is a very delicate relationship and it 
must be mentioned here when discussing fluidity.   
 
Fluidity only occurs when everything else i s aligned and calm. It 
occurs when you've been doing something for years; such as driving 

--- PAGE 156 ---
or riding a bike. Compare the effort required in your first trade in 
your first year to the effort required to a trade taken in your second 
year, or fifth year, or te nth year? Eventually, practically effortless, if 
the trader can survive the gruesome learning curve and overcome 
the psychological threshold into trading consistency.   
The Science behind Fluidity   
Patrick Gannon, PhD is a Clinical and Performance Psycholog ist in San 
Francisco;   
the following are notes based on his work on great musicians.   
 
What is happening in the minds and bodies  of [elite traders] when they [trade] their best? Are peak 
performance and flow simply subjective perceptions of performance excellence? Or are they distinct mental 
states, a defined set of optimal behaviors, a heightened sense of self -confidence, or some  trick  of human 
nature?  
Despite the confusion, we do have language to describe these experiences —being in the zone, in rhythm,  in a 
groove, playing unconscious, even the so -called runner’s high. For starters, peak performance refers to 
optimal physical behaviors while psychologists define flow as a mental state. It is both mental and physical 
because they feel calm, alert, focuse d, challenged, but confident, fully present in the moment, and supremely 
engaged in the task.   
If only we could bottle it.  
 
 
The Flow State  
Research findings have identified three markers that reveal how and when flow occurs: alpha/theta brain 
waves, brain  coherence, and deactivation of the dorso -lateral, pre -frontal cortex (DLPFC).  
First, the flow state is located at the crossover point between alpha and theta brain waves (eight Hz and 
below). As brain activity slows from the relaxing alpha state into the hypnagogic theta wave (below eight Hz), 
the neural network becomes highly attuned. At the same time, super fast (40 -100 Hz) gamma waves, 
triggered by theta, go into action. Gamma waves connect information drawn from various parts of the brain 
that are invo lved in music making, allowing skill learning, procedural memory, and self -expression to settle 
into rhythm.  

--- PAGE 157 ---
Secondly, synchronization between the left and right hemispheres or brain coherence is another marker for 
flow. Both hemispheres must be working co mplementarily to integrate artistic expression and technical skills. 
Cardio exercise, meditation, and yoga along with brain -based clinical techniques, like eye movement 
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR), all promote brain coherence through bi -lateral  stimulation.  
 
 
Enhancing Flow  
Finally, a temporary brain state called transient hypofrontality has been identified that enhances flow by 
lowering the activation of the DLPFC. This part of the brain holds our inner critic, that voice of doubt that can 
trigger cognitive anxiety. Cardio exercise redirects blood flow away from the DLPFC to the motor parts of the 
brain, enabling a more embodied focus without interference from self -consciousness, distraction, or negative 
thinking.  
These findings can be applied t o mental skill training that has been the hallmark of sport psychology over the 
last 50 years. The six key skills are relaxation, imagery, goal setting, self -talk, concentration, and pre -
performance routines.  
1) Relaxation  is the first key because performa nce anxiety usually inhibits peak performance. Anxiety and 
physiological arousal must be regulated before peak performance and flow can occur. Exercise is a basic 
treatment for all types of anxiety. Daily meditation over a minimum of eight weeks reduces bo th state and 
trait anxiety by lowering the resting heart rate and enhancing brain plasticity.  
2) Imagery  engages the power of the senses, especially visualization, to mentally depict what peak 
performance should look and feel like. Cardio imagery and rehea rsal is a new technique that combines 
mental rehearsal with moderate cardio exercise (120 -140 heart rate, using an elliptical trainer or stationary 
bike) to prime learning and reinforce process goals. Mental rehearsal is effective because mirror neurons 
activate various muscle groups via the peripheral nervous system in the same way as with physical practice.  
3) Goal setting  is a motivational tool for directing one’s efforts toward optimal learning. Goal setting supports 
deliberate practice that encourages musicians to concentrate their efforts on their most challenging 
repertoire. Exercising in the morning before practice, while mentally focusing on what needs work, helps 
identify practice goals and primes the brain for learning later on.  
4) Self -talk revea ls the psychological relationship between the person and the performer, such as having a 
positive outlook and being mentally tough when under stress. Research shows that positive thoughts and 
feelings promote creativity whereas negative emotions stimulate critical thinking that can lead to self -

--- PAGE 158 ---
consciousness. Not surprisingly, a positive mental attitude is a key component  
of flow.  
5) Concentration  emphasizes attention skills and mental discipline to focus on the challenges involved in 
music performance. The  mind must be fully engaged in the moment, free of distractions, and immersed in 
the task. Quite simply, the best way to build focusing skills is to learn to live in the moment. Not so easy, as 
many of us have found out!  
6) Pre -performance routines  allow m usicians to find that groove that activates a positive performance 
mindset. The key tools are breathing and centering exercises, locking into one’s optimal zone of activation 
and converting pre -performance jitters into excitement.  
 
Conclusion  
Fluidity requires discovering many different pieces of the trading 
puzzle and putting them all together harmoniously. This process must 
occur over a period of years, not months. Year 1 traders are very 
early and fluidity is far off just like the first stages of lea rning to drive 
are full of hassle and effort. As the years go by, and the mistakes are 
made and lessons are applied, the traders approach and 
methodology becomes more a part of their individual trading 
mindset and personality.   
 
The realization of the impo rtance of detachment from outcomes sets 
in and the trader starts to predict less and react more. More proper 
trading, and less thinking. Alignment with their instrument and 
becoming in -tune with the market movements, all combined with 
proper risk managemen t techniques, and the trader may start to 
taste trading fluidity. Do not think about it too much; or it disappears. 
Focus on your proper trading process implemented on your 
instrument and over the years fluidity will visit you without you 
telling it.   
 
 

--- PAGE 159 ---
 Final Words  
What is the most important part of trading success?  
 
Gratitude.   
 
The proper trader needs to learn to be grateful for the wins; that part 
is easy. The trader also needs to learn to be grateful for the losing 
streaks as well. There is a lesson i n all things that happen, and the 
trader must exhibit humility and extract the lesson from the 
circumstance is a big differentiating factor. Obviously this is 
extremely difficult, especially in the early non -profitable stages of the 
traders career during w hich they conduct their period of charitable 
contributions to the markets. Do not become one of the many 
trading corpses that gave in to defeat at the last minute. It is a very 
expensive skill to learn, both financially and emotionally, but if the 
trader c an learn to get past themselves and compare figuring out this 
"trading" thing like learning to drive or ride a bicycle. Proper trading 
is much more complicated and will take many years, but the question 
to ask is whether acquiring this skill is worth the e ffort.   
 
 
 
 
 
